---
layout: post
title: Research Data Management and Sharing -- a short talk by the depositar team at the Institute of Earth Sciences, Academia Sinica
date: 2025-02-20 10:00:00+0800
inline: False
---

On February 13, 2025, the depositar team was invited by the Institute of Earth Sciences at the Academia Sinica to share experience about research data management during their weekly Geotalk event.

In the short talk, titled "Research data management and sharing with the depositar, a research data repository", the depositar team colaborated with Dr. Wen-Tzong Liang of the Institute of Earth Sciences and Prof. Tai-Lin Tseng to create an Earth Sciences project use case, the [Armenia Seismic Array](https://data.depositar.io/en/organization/armeniaseismicarray). 

This presentation also marks the first collaboration between our team and earth sciences scholars. During this collaboration, we had the opportunity to gain a deeper understanding of the considerations and needs for research data management and sharing in the field of earth sciences. For example, details such as the scale and diversity of Earth science research data as well as the need of dataset citation all provided us with a deeper insight into research data management practices.

The presentation slide deck is made available on the *depositar* at [https://pid.depositar.io/ark:37281/k5x825v5q](https://pid.depositar.io/ark:37281/k5x825v5q).

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/news/250213_title.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption mt-0">
    <b>Tyng-Ruey Chuang with the presentation title page. (Photo by James X. Morris, <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">CC BY-SA</a>)</b>
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/news/250213_example.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption mt-0">
    <b>The library space with the talk audience and the depositar team at the Institute of Earth Sciences with the projection screen showing the "Armenia Seismic Array" project. (Photo by ally, <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/">CC BY</a>)</b>
</div>
