---
layout: post
title: The Depositar Team Presented at the 2025 Web Archiving Conference (WAC)
date: 2025-04-18 00:00:00+0800
inline: False
---

The depositar team recently attended the [Web Archiving Conference 2025 (WAC2025)](https://netpreserve.org/ga2025/programme/wac/) in Oslo, Norway, and gave a presentation in the [Discovery & Access (News/Newspapers)](https://www.conftool.pro/iipc2025/index.php?page=browseSessions&print=embed&form_session=75&presentations=show) session. The following is the title and an abridged abstract of the presentation. 

_Recently Orphaned Newspapers: From Archived Webpages to Reusable Datasets and Research Outlooks_

Tyng-Ruey Chuang, Chia-Hsun Wang, and Hung-Yen Wu  

> We report on our progress in converting the web archives of a recently orphaned newspaper into accessible article collections in IPTC (International Press Telecommunications Council) standard  format for news representation. After the conversion, old articles extracted from a defunct news website are now reincarnated as research datasets meeting the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) data principles. Specifically, we focus on Taiwan's _Apple Daily_ and work on the WARC files built by the Archive Team in September 2022 at a time when the future of the newspaper seemed dim. We convert these WARC files into de-duplicated collections of pure text in ninjs (News in JSON) format. ... 

> Our work in transforming the WARC records into ninjs objects produces a collection of unique 953,175 news articles totaling in 4.3 GB. The articles are grouped by the day/month/year they were published hence it is convenient to look into a specific date for the news that were published on that day. Metadata about each article &mdash; headline(s), subject(s), original URI, unique ID, among others &mdash; are mapped into the corresponding fields in the ninjs object for ready access. ...

The [slideset](https://data.depositar.io/en/dataset/recently-orphaned-newspapers/resource/62a89902-a1e3-4229-a8be-6d266a181e8c) and the [script](https://data.depositar.io/en/dataset/recently-orphaned-newspapers/resource/c5e6152a-f3a2-48ee-8515-306ffe4c226b) used in the presentation can be found at the _depositar_ ([ark:37281/k5p3h9k37](https://pid.depositar.io/ark:37281/k5p3h9k37)). 

<center>
<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/news/Recently_Orphaned_Newspapers_p1.png" alt="Presentation from the depositar team at the 2025 Web Archiving Conference" class="img-thumbnail" %}
    </div>
</div>
</center>
<div class="caption">
    <b>Presentation from the <em>depositar</em> team at the 2025 Web Archiving Conference</b>
</div>
