---
layout: about
title: about
permalink: /
subtitle: <a href='https://www.linkedin.com/in/josethiagogonsalves/'>Affiliations</a> . Virginia Tech . UBC

profile:
  align: right
  image: prof_pic.jpg
  image_circular: false # crops the image to make it circular
  more_info: >
    <p>Computational Multiphysics Laboratory</p>
    <p>Universisty of British Columbia</p>
    <p>Vancouver, BC V6R2H5</p>

news: true # includes a list of news items
selected_papers: true # includes a list of papers marked as "selected={true}"
social: true # includes social icons at the bottom of the page
---

I  received my bachelor’s degrees (summa cum laude) in Aerospace and Ocean Engineering from Virginia Tech in 2016 after which I worked as a Naval Architect & Marine Engineer primarily serving the Gulf of Mexico's offshore energy and the Great Lakes' bulk-carrier sectors.  At present, I am wrapping up my graduate studies (Mechanical Engineering) while conducting research in UBC's Computational Multiphysics Lab under the supervision of Dr. Rajeev Jaiman. My research is focused on the development of robust, efficient and scalable coupling algorithms for the (partitioned) high-fidelity simulation of fluid-structure-acoustic phenomenon. The specific aim of my work, as part of the broader NSERC funded "future intelligent and green marine vessels (IGMVs)" project, is the reduction of underwater noise pollution generated by maritime traffic. 

Being insatiably curious and a passionate learner; if you have any interesting opportunities, need assistance on a technical task, or would like to discuss emerging trends in computational physics, please do feel free to reach out. I am most easily accessible via my personal email address (josetg@vt.edu).

Gallup Strengths Finder test results: 
Competition, Ideation, Relator, Analytical, and Focus.