---
layout: page
permalink: /life_advice/
title: life advice
nav: false
nav_order: 4
---

A collection of life advice from sources I admire:
- **Aim for great work.** Think big and take risks. Not only is it allowable but it is cowardly not to. The gain is in the struggle and not the achievement itself.
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "I have to get you to drop modesty and say to yourself: Yes, I would like to do first-class work.", "If you do not work on an important problem, you are not going to do important work."
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "I always want to work on a project that, if successful, will make the rest of my career look like a footnote.", "If you are making progress on an important problem, you will have a constant tailwind of people wanting to help you. Let yourself grow more ambitious, and don’t be afraid to work on what you really want to work on."
    - [How to do Great Work](http://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html), Paul Graham: "If you don't try to be the best, you won't even be good.", "Take as much risk as you can afford. In an efficient market, risk is proportionate to reward, so don't look for certainty, but for a bet with high expected value. If you're not failing occasionally, you're probably being too conservative."
    - [Principles](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/principles/), Ray Dalio: "If you limit your goals to what you know you can achieve, you are setting the bar way too low."
- **Nurture and follow your curiosity.** Explore what energizes you and let it drive you. Your curiosity is your main source of motivation and your best guide towards important problems. Protect it like a living organism. You can learn anything you’re curious about. 
    - [How to do Great Work](http://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html), Paul Graham: "Your curiosity never lies, and it knows more than you do about what's worth paying attention to. If you asked an oracle the secret to doing great work and the oracle replied with a single word, my bet would be on curiosity.", "Husband your morale. It's the basis of everything when you're working on ambitious projects. You have to nurture and protect it like a living organism.", "Stop occasionally and ask yourself: Am I working on what I most want to work on?”
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "The most successful people I know are primarily internally driven; they do what they do to impress themselves and because they feel compelled to make something happen in the world."
    - [How to Get Rich (Without Getting Lucky)](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1002103360646823936), Naval: "Arm yourself with specific knowledge, accountability, and leverage. Specific knowledge is found by pursuing your genuine curiosity and passion. Building specific knowledge will feel like play to you but will look like work to others."
- **Put in hard work.** Not only is work stamina the only path to being the best, but you are most happy when deeply committed. Avoid burnout by doing work you enjoy with people you enjoy working with.
    - [How to do Great Work](http://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html), Paul Graham: "Four steps to great work: choose a field, learn enough to get to the frontier, notice gaps, explore promising ones. Steps two and four will require hard work. It may not be possible to prove that you have to work hard to do great things, but the empirical evidence is on the scale of the evidence for mortality."
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "Knowledge and productivity are like compound interest. Given two people of approximately the same ability and one person who works ten percent more than the other, the latter will more than twice outproduce the former. The more you know, the more you learn; the more you learn, the more you can do; the more you can do, the more the opportunity."
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "You can get to about the 90th percentile in your field by working either smart or hard, which is still a great accomplishment. But getting to the 99th percentile requires both—you will be competing with other very talented people who will have great ideas and be willing to work a lot. Extreme people get extreme results. As in most cases, momentum compounds, and success begets success."
- **Develop your vision.**
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "Having a vision is what tends to separate the leaders from the followers.", "For many years, I devoted 10% of my time (Friday afternoons) to trying to understand what would happen in the future of computing thinking about: What is possible? What is likely to happen? What is desirable to have happen?"
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "Learn to think independently. Entrepreneurship is very difficult to teach because original thinking is very difficult to teach. You have to cultivate it on your own."
- **Learn to communicate your vision.**
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "All great careers, to some degree, become sales jobs. You have to evangelize your plans to customers, prospective employees, the press, investors, etc. This requires an inspiring vision, strong communication skills, some degree of charisma, and evidence of execution ability."
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "The duty of a great scientist is not only to find new things but to communicate them successfully in at least three forms: writing papers and books, prepared public talks, and impromptu talks."
- **Once you picked a problem, focus.**
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "The way to manage yourself is that when you have a real important problem you don't let anything else get the center of your attention. Keep your subconscious starved so it has to work on your problem, so you can sleep peacefully and get the answer in the morning, free."
    - [How to do Great Work](http://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html), Paul Graham: "Great work usually entails spending what would seem to most people an unreasonable amount of time on a problem."
- **Master the fundamentals and learn to learn.**
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "Knowledge increases exponentially, roughly doubling every 17 years. You must concentrate on fundamentals and develop the ability to learn new fields of knowledge when they arise."
- **Seek out the best colleagues.** The most effective way to learn any craft is by working with the best at this craft. The best colleagues challenge and surprise you.
    - [How to do Great Work](http://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html), Paul Graham: "Quality is more important than quantity in colleagues. It's better to have one or two great ones than a building full of pretty good ones.", "Sufficiently good colleagues offer surprising insights. They can see and do things that you can't."
- **Build long-term relationships.** Make time to meet and help forces of nature. 
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "Great work requires teams. The size of the network of really talented people you know often becomes the limiter for what you can accomplish. An effective way to build a network is to help people as much as you can.", "I try to always ask myself when I meet someone new 'is this person a force of nature?' It’s a pretty good heuristic for finding people who are likely to accomplish great things."
- **Cultivate almost too much self-belief.** Believing in yourself is necessary to have contrarian ideas about the future and convincing others. Build self-belief by getting things done. Balance self-belief with self-awareness by carefully listening to criticism. 
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "Managing your own morale — and your team’s morale — is one of the greatest challenges of most endeavors. It’s almost impossible without a lot of self-belief. And unfortunately, the more ambitious you are, the more the world will try to tear you down.", "One of the most powerful lessons to learn is that you can figure out what to do in situations that seem to have no solution. The more times you do this, the more you will believe it."
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "Once you get your courage up and believe that you can do important problems, then you can. If you think you can't, almost surely you are not going to."
- **Be willful.**
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "A big secret is that you can bend the world to your will a surprising percentage of the time — most people don’t even try, and just accept that things are the way that they are.", "Almost always, the people who say 'I am going to keep going until this works, and no matter what the challenges are I’m going to figure them out', and mean it, go on to succeed."
- **Be hard to compete with by building leverage.**
    - [How to be Successful](https://blog.samaltman.com/how-to-be-successful), Sam Altman: "The best way to become difficult to compete with is to build up leverage. For example, you can do it with personal relationships, by building a strong personal brand, or by getting good at the intersection of multiple different fields."
    - [How to Get Rich (Without Getting Lucky)](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1002103360646823936), Naval: "Fortunes require leverage. Business leverage comes from capital, people, and products with no marginal cost of replication (code and media). Leverage is a force multiplier for your judgement."
- **Be radically open-minded.** Seek ideas and feedback that contradict your view of the world and yourself.
    - [Principles](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/principles/), Ray Dalio: "The most important thing I learned is an approach to life based on thoughtful disagreement, in which the goal is not to convince the other party that you are right—but rather to find out which view is true and decide what to do about it.", "Find the most believable people possible who disagree with you and try to understand their reasoning. This is the quickest way to learn and to increase your probability of being right."
    - [The Art of Doing Science and Engineering](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/the-art-of-doing-science-and-engineering/), Richard Hamming: "Regularly ask about your most deeply held beliefs: Why do I believe what I do? What evidence would I accept to be proven wrong?"
- **Be radically transparent.**
    - [Principles](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/principles/), Ray Dalio: "Understanding what is true is essential for success, and being radically transparent about everything, including mistakes and weaknesses, helps create the understanding that leads to improvements."
- **Embrace failure as a tool for growth.**
    - [Principles](https://theophilegervet.github.io/book_notes/principles/), Ray Dalio: "If you’re not failing, you’re not pushing your limits, and if you’re not pushing your limits, you’re not maximizing your potential.", "Pain + Reflection = Progress"
- **Embrace accountability.**
    - [How to Get Rich (Without Getting Lucky)](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1002103360646823936), Naval: "Embrace accountability, and take business risks under your own name. Society will reward you with responsibility, equity, and leverage."
