---
layout: page
title: Embodied neural models 
description:  Using neural models controling robot bodies to study how the nervous system, body, and environment interact to produce behavior
img: /assets/img/12.jpg
importance: 1
---
To understand adaptive behavior, it is important to realize that the nervous system does not function in isolation. The brain is embodied, and the body is embedded in the environment. The properties, mechanisms, and functions of the nervous system arise only as it interacts with the rest of the body and as the animal behaves in the world.

Therefore I studied synthetic neural models performing behavioral tasks comparable to those used in animal experiments. The models are embodied in physical or virtual robots that interact richly with a complex environment. These neurorobotic models are used to explore potential neural mechanisms supporting behavior without ignoring the complexities of brain-body-environment interaction. Additionally, neurorobotic models can yield useful methods for engineering adaptive behavior in robots. Thus my work on adaptive behavior has two branches, one that addresses questions about the mechanisms of the mind through synthetic neural modeling, and one that uses the understanding generated by those models to create autonomous adaptive machines.

I have taken this approach to study the neural processes underlying episodic memory, working memory, visual perception, action selection, and consciousness. Highlights include






