---
layout: page
title: Seismic hybridly!
description: The first commercial seismic acquisition combined streamer and OBN, Quad 35, Norway.
img: assets/img/post/q35.jpg
importance: 2
year: 2019-2020
category: work
---

In this project, I worked as a technician for the contract technical review, onboard acquisition, data QC & reprocessing, and follow-up work. I got [the best
commendation from the client](https://i.imgur.com/9AdYJxi.jpg) for modeling this novel acquisition to make it more efficient and understandable.

## The operation 

Q35 project was carried out from July to September 2020 offshore Bergen, [which is the first hybrid seismic acquisition combined streamers and nodes.](https://www.seismicpartner.com/seismic-partner-mcg-and-geoex-are-pleased-to-announce-that-the-lumiseis-quad-35-hybrid-mc3d-survey-has-successfully-been-completed/) The simultaneous acquisition makes Q35 being able to fulfill the Ultra high-density(UHD) data from streamer and FWI capacity from sparse node with a competitive price.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/blue-sea-2.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/blue-sea-3.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/q35-3.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Have seen so many magic skies onboard. Photos by Zhihao. Figure from seismicpartner.com
</div>
<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/q35-5.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Vermeer(2002) mentioned this novel idea in his book. However, there are combination undershooting cases and standalone sparse node cases, but no simultaneous case until the Q35. 
</div>

## The advantages

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/q35-4.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A tight and efficient configuration is well displayed by drone view. Photo by Zhihao.
</div>

`Wide-towed sources` and narrow streamer separation: 
- to make UHD dataset.
- to get more near-offset sampling, and better supporting AVO.
- a more evenly-spread-shots makes `streamer + node` achievable.

Node deployment: overall sparse but dense on the sweet spot:
- FWI.
- Wide azimuth, Low frequency, high S/N...

## The future is not streamer vs node.

`UHD Streamer + Sparse node` is the future. More sources and even wider towing will significantly benefit hybrid acquisition.


<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/q35-6.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/post/q35-7.png" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    (left) More streamers? No, I prefer more wide-towed sources. (right) The shot point distribution will be no gaps if using quad-sources. Plot by Offshoreorient studio.
</div>

