---
layout: page
title: Scheduling Fall 2020 Courses at Cornell
description: ORIE 4330 project involving an optimization problem with large amounts of data.
#img: /assets/img/cornell.jpg
importance: 2
category: Cornell
---

In this project, I have constructed an optimization problem in python that schedules Cornell’s 2020 roster. By making use of the gurobi interface in python, I was able to model the mixed-ILP that considered a wide variety of constraints. Firstly, I needed to ensure that all scheduled classes are assigned a “pattern” for class meeting characteristics (days of meeting, class duration, start time). Then, I made sure to avoid assigning classes that had either a hard conflict, a soft conflict, or an instructor conflict. Next, I assigned all classes that are required to be taught concurrently by giving them both the same pattern. As an additional factor, some “fixed” classes already have a predetermined pattern.  Next, I made sure to calculate calculate classroom demand as the number of classes of a particular capacity, starting time, and duration that will occur on a particular day. Consequently, I wrote constraints for each time block that ensured that classroom demand did not exceed the classroom capacity. The final constraint takes into consideration the fact that smaller classes can be upgraded to larger classrooms and larger classes can be downgraded to smaller smaller classrooms. Classroom demand can then be redefined to reflect the number of classes upgraded and downgraded. The objective function aims to minimize the weighted number of unscheduled classes, the weighted number of hard conflicts violated, the weighted number of soft conflicts violated, the number of downgraded classes, and the number of classes that are scheduled outside of their preferred start time. 