---
layout: page
title: Dark matter
description: distribution, structure and content in galaxies
img: assets/img/apostle_trio.png
importance: 1
category: science
related_publications: 2023MNRAS.521.1316R,2023MNRAS.522.3318D,2020MNRAS.495...58S,2019MNRAS.482..821O,2018MNRAS.476.2168M,2018MNRAS.474.1398G,2017MNRAS.464.2419S,2016MNRAS.460.3610O,2016MNRAS.457.1931S,2015MNRAS.452.3650O
toc: true
---

## Introduction

My main line of research focuses on the dark matter content and structure in galaxies. I first became interested in dark matter as a research topic (beyond the level of 'dark matter - that sounds cool!') as a senior undergraduate when the various parametrizations (NFW, Einasto, ...) of dark matter density profiles came up in lecture. I remember wondering how we could possibly have such a detailed understanding of the distribution of something so little understood.

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/colibre.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="65%" caption="A map of the dark matter density (left) and atomic gas density (right) in a simulated dwarf galaxy from a development version of the COLIBRE galaxy formation model. Velocity vectors of a subset of the gas particles are shown with arrows in the right panel. The gas is in a rotationally-supported disc, but perturbed by supernova explosions that have opened up the bubbles visible in the disc - these also clearly perturb the velocity field." %}

## Background & past projects

I picked up some more background knowledge while doing my MSc in [satellite galaxy evolution](/projects/satellites), enough that once I was accepted to the PhD programme in [Victoria](www.uvic.ca) and got round to picking a project I proposed to work on the cusp-core problem supervised by Julio Navarro. This 'problem' was at the time a statement of the fact that simulations of dark matter evolving under the influence of gravity forms clumps ('halos') that get denser towards their centres with a power law slope of about -1, while observations of some galaxies are more consistent with a central region of constant dark matter density (power law slope of 0). The original papers on the subject go back to the mid-nineties, so this was not a newly identified discrepancy. Right around the same time there were some major advances in simulations that soon culminated in the [EAGLE simulations](https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stu2058) and the many associated spinoff projects, including the APOSTLE project {% cite 2016MNRAS.457.1931S %} that I was heavily involved in. Rotation curves of galaxies from the [THINGS](https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/141/6/193) and especially the [LITTLE&nbsp;THINGS](https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/149/6/180) 21&#8209;cm radio surveys surveys were also being published around the same time. This combination of circumstances offered an opportunity to make some new contributions on the subject.

### Dwarf galaxies

Dwarf galaxies typically have low stellar and gas densities, low enough that even in there centres the dark matter density can be higher than the visible matter density. Since the dark matter is then the main contributor to the gravitational potential, dwarf galaxies make good targets for study since the dark matter 'signal' is high relative to the visible matter 'noise'.

### Rotation curves

One way to measure the dark matter content and distribution in a galaxy is with a rotation curve. In the simplest case, the speed $$v$$ of a particle on a circular orbit of radius $$r$$ in a spherically-symmetric gravitational potential is related to the mass enclosed within the orbit $$M(<r)$$ as $$v(r)=\sqrt{GM(<r)/r}$$. If we can measure the orbital speeds of "tracer" particles at a series of radii to build up the rotation curve $$v(r)$$, we directly get the mass profile $$M(<r)$$. If we subtract off the mass profile of the visible matter (stars, gas) we're left with the dark matter mass profile.

In realistic galaxies there are some complications:

 - the gravitational potential is probably not spherically symmetric (but if the mass budget is dominated by dark matter it might be a reasonable approximation);
 - the "tracer" particles are probably not all on circular orbits;
 - with the exception of the Milky Way and galaxies in its immediate vicinity, we only measure angular positions and velocities along the line of sight, so we have incomplete information;
 - gravity may not be the only force acting.

Nevertheless, in some cases these complications can be modelled or neglected and the general approach still works.

21&#8209;cm, radio or 'HI' emission from atomic hydrogen is perhaps the best-known spectral line used to measure rotation curves. The atomic gas has the advantage of often extending well beyond the stellar disc, allowing measurements to larger radii, and the emission physics and radiative transfer are quite simple, making it relatively easy to model.

### The 'diversity' of dwarf galaxy rotation curves

When I started working on the cusp-core problem the conversation in the literature centred around the slope of the dark matter density profile measured at as small a radius as possible. This has some drawbacks, chiefly that the 'figure of merit' (that slope) is very far from what is actually measured (a rotation curve, at least at the first-derived-data-product level). To get from a rotation curve to a density profile first the rotation curve needs to be interpreted as a mass profile (with some uncertainty). Then a derivative needs to be taken to get a density profile, followed by a second derivative to measure its slope. Pushing to the smallest possible radius makes this even more challenging, as does the fact that the dark matter density profile is usually thought of in log-density and log-radius, while the rotation curve is sampled linearly in radius. One of the main goals of my first paper {% cite 2015MNRAS.452.3650O %} on the topic was to propose a formulation of the cusp-core problem that is much more directly anchored in what is actually measured. Comparing the amplitude of the rotation curve at an 'inner' and an 'outer' radius turns out to do the job, as summarised in Fig.&nbsp;5 of the paper:

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/diversity.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="85%" caption="Rotation curves of four dwarf irregular galaxies of approximately the same maximum rotation speed <nobr>V<sub>max</sub></nobr> (<nobr>80-100 km s<sup>-1</sup></nobr>) and galaxy mass, chosen to illustrate the diversity of rotation curve shapes at given <nobr>V<sub>max</sub></nobr>. Coloured solid curves and shaded areas correspond to the median (and <nobr>10<sup>th</sup>-90<sup>th</sup></nobr> percentile) circular velocity curve of simulated galaxies matching (within 10&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent) the maximum circular velocity of each galaxy. Note that the observed rotation curves exhibit a much wider diversity than seen in the simulations, from galaxies like UGC&nbsp;5721, which are consistent with our simulations, to galaxies like IC&nbsp;2574, which show a much more slowly-rising rotation curve compared with simulations, either hydrodynamical (coloured lines) or dark matter-only (black lines)." %}

Since the four galaxies have a fixed <nobr>V<sub>max</sub></nobr>, the shapes of their rotation curves can be parametrised with one number, the amplitude at an inner radius. In this initial paper we used 2&nbsp;kpc, but later {% cite 2020MNRAS.495...58S %} refined our definition so that the 'inner' radius scales with the size of the galaxy, leading to a figure that had a lot of influence in the field (this version from the later paper's Fig.&nbsp;2):

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/vfid_vmax.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="65%" caption="Rotation speed at the inner radius <nobr>V<sub>fid</sub></nobr> versus maximum rotation speed for all galaxies in our observational sample. Galaxies with rapidly-rising rotation curves lie near the 1:1 dotted line. Rotation curves with <nobr>(V<sub>fid</sub>, V<sub>max</sub>)</nobr> values consistent with dark matter-only ΛCDM halos lie along the grey curve and shaded area, computed using the median <nobr>M<sub>200</sub>(c)</nobr> relation (plus 10-90 and 1-99 percentiles) for a Planck-normalized cosmology. Slowly-rising rotation curves (i.e. 'cored' galaxies with a substantial inner mass deficit relative to ΛCDM) lie below the grey-shaded area. Each galaxy is labelled with its name and coloured according to <nobr>η<sub>rot</sub></nobr>, which we adopt as a simple measure of rotation curve shape." %}

The 'diversity' from the title of the paper refers to the vertical scatter for galaxies with V<sub>max</sub> between about 50 and <nobr>150 km s<sup>-1</sup></nobr> - typically these are dwarf irregular (dIrr) or low-surface brightness (LSB) galaxies. The usefulness of this figure comes from the fact that the quantities plotted on the axes are much closer to what is directly measured than other attempts to express something similar in terms of the slope of the dark matter density profile, for example. It should not, however, be considered in isolation. It is true that dIrr and LSB galaxies exhibit diversity in their central matter content at fixed dynamical mass, as the figure shows, but it is not random. I've been asked before how it can be that the rotation curves of low-mass galaxies have diverse shapes, yet can give rise to the [radial acceleration relation](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.201101) (RAR), that strongly suggests uniformity rather than diversity. Part of the answer is that the shapes of the rotation curves correlate strongly with some properties of galaxies, notably their [surface brightnesses](https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8205/827/1/L19) (or surface densities if gas is included, or other related metrics). The total matter surface density seems to correlate, perhaps more strongly than we'd expect, with the visible matter surface density. Expressing things in terms of surface densities, as the RAR essentially does, highlights this in a way that the V<sub>fid</sub> vs. V<sub>max</sub> figure does not.

### Explaining the diversity in rotation curve shapes

Another point that we {% cite 2015MNRAS.452.3650O %} emphasized is that there are a limited number of ways that the diversity in low-mass galaxy rotation curve shapes can be explained. The comprehensive list has only 4 items:

 - Dark matter could be re-distributed away from a cuspy distribution by the physics of normal matter, such as by the gravitational influence of [gas flows driven by repeated cycles of gas cooling and supernova-driven winds](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20571.x).
 - Dark matter could be re-distributed away from a cuspy distribution by the physics of dark matter, such as by [a collisional interaction between pairs of dark matter particles](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.3760).
 - Our interpretation of the measurements may be incorrect because we have assumed the wrong gravitational force law (i.e. we could consider alternatives such as [modified Newtonian dynamics](https://doi.org/10.1086/161131)).
 - Our interpretation of the measurements may be incorrect because we have made flawed assumptions in modelling the data.

Much of my work since has been focused on the last point as a possible explanation. I am at this point convinced that there are systematic errors in the modelling and interpretation of the rotation of low-mass galaxies at a level that cannot be ignored. That these would be enough to completely resolve the cusp-core debate by making every galaxy consistent with hosting a dark matter cusp if they were corrected, however, seems like a stretch. My view is therefore that we need to clean up the modelling to know what we should be aiming for more broadly with galaxy formation models (like: how much do we need stellar feedback to reshape the dark matter distribution in galaxies?).

I think that much of the systematic error budget in modelling the gas kinematics in low-mass galaxies can be assigned to mismatches between the assumptions made in the models and reality. A straightforward example is that the classical 'tilted-ring' approach assumes that at any given radius the gas is axisymmetric, with no modulation in velocity around the ring. This is essentially guaranteed to be false at some level, and our work {% cite 2019MNRAS.482..821O %} with simulated galaxies suggests that gas in roughly elliptical orbits (rather than circular) could realistically drive a lot of the scatter in rotation curve shapes. A clear example of such elongated orbits is illustrated in that paper's Fig.&nbsp;6:

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/vel_map.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="65%" caption="Face-on map of the residual azimuthal motions (after subtracting the mean rotation as a function of radius) in the disc plane for a dwarf irregular galaxy from the APOSTLE simulation suite. The red and blue lines correspond to the directions that approximately lie along the principal axes of the bisymmetric (m=2) pattern in the residual velocity field. They grey circles are drawn at intervals of 5&nbsp;kpc." %}

The elongation of the gas orbits is probably driven by an elongated shape of the dark matter halos in which they are embedded {% cite 2018MNRAS.476.2168M %}. A similar argument applies to the assumption that the gas disc is geometrically thin, when in fact it is likely thick enough that any given sight line through an inclined disc passes through several of the rings that it is decomposed into in a model.

We {% cite 2019MNRAS.482..821O %} summarized the cumulative effects of gas being perturbed so that it doesn't quite rotate at the circular velocity (V<sub>ϕ</sub> compared to V<sub>circ</sub>) and then of systematic errors in modelling the gas kinematics (modeled mock observations compared to V<sub>ϕ</sub>) in the same space of inner rotation velocity versus maximum rotation velocity explained above. The initially tightly clustered circular velocity curve shapes (from V<sub>circ</sub>, red points) end up looking much more like the observed distribution (blue points) once they are "observed" and modelled (black points) in the same way as the observations (from the paper's Fig.&nbsp;9):

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/v2_vmax_mocks.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="65%" caption="Circular velocity at 2&nbsp;kpc plotted against maximum circular velocity, a measure of the 'central mass deficit'. The lines are reproduced from fig.&nbsp;6 of Oman&nbsp;et&nbsp;al. (2015). The solid black line indicates the expected correlation for an NFW mass profile and the mass concentration relation of Ludlow&nbsp;et&nbsp;al. (2014); this is well traced by halos in dark-matter-only versions of the APOSTLE and EAGLE simulations. Values measured from the circular velocity profiles of galaxies from the (hydrodynamical) APOSTLE and EAGLE simulations lie along the red line. The broken lines indicate the correlation for the same (NFW) profile but removing a fixed amount of mass from the central 2&nbsp;kpc, as labelled. Three points are shown for each of the APOSTLE galaxies in our sample: one for the circular velocity at 2&nbsp;kpc (red), another for the gas azimuthal speed corrected for pressure support (green), and a third for the <sup>3D</sup>BAROLO estimates of the rotation speed corrected for pressure support (black). Each quantity as shown as a function of the maximum of the circular velocity of each system, V<sub>max</sub>. We show measurements from the THINGS (blue diamonds) and LITTLE THINGS (blue squares) surveys for comparison." %}

### Further hints to the origin of the diversity in rotation curve shapes

The next significant development that I was involved in {% cite 2020MNRAS.495...58S %} was the development of a somewhat compressed version of the rotation curve shape plot (V<sub>fid</sub> vs V<sub>max</sub> or V<sub>(2&nbsp;kpc)</sub> vs V<sub>max</sub>) so that information about the dynamical importance of the dark matter could also be included. The y-axis shows a parameter η<sub>rot</sub>=V<sub>fid</sub>/V<sub>max</sub> that summarises how steeply-rising the rotation curve is, while the x-axis shows η<sub>bar</sub>, that is approximately equal to the ratio of baryonic-to-total mass in the central regions of a galaxy. (This version taken from Fig.&nbsp;4 of the paper.)

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/eta_eta.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="65%" caption="Rotation curve shape parameter, η<sub>rot</sub>, as a function of the gravitational importance of the baryonic component at the inner fiducial radius, η<sub>bar</sub>, for a sample of observed galaxies. The latter is approximately the ratio between baryonic and total enclosed masses withing r<sub>fid</sub>. Galaxies are coloured by maximum circular velocity, as indicated by the colourbar. Dark matter-only ΛCDM halos have, on average, η<sub>rot</sub> ~0.65, with 10:90 percentile scatter as indicated by the grey band. Systems with η<sub>bar</sub><0.09 are shown at that value for clarity." %}

The distribution of low-mass galaxies (orange to black on the colour bar) in this space turns out to be very informative. The trend runs from the upper left of the figure to the lower right, with plenty of scatter. In words, this means that the most centrally 'dark matter-dominated' galaxies have the steeply-rising rotation curves associated with dark matter cusps, while centrally baryon-dominated galaxies have slowly-rising rotation curves associated with dark matter cores. In some contexts this could be intuitive. For example, if we hypothesize that cores are created by re-distribution of dark matter following episodes supernova-driven winds, then it makes sense that having a high enough baryon density in the centre of the galaxy to have a significant dynamical influence on the dark matter would be a pre-requisite. As we went through in detail in the paper, however, no simulation or similar model at the time could satisfactorily reproduce the observed trend (and to my knowledge this hasn't changed since, with the possible exception of the [New Horizon](https://new.horizon-simulation.org/) simulations). It turns out, however, that the types of systematic errors that come up when trying to model the gas kinematics in these kinds of galaxies, like those due to non-circular gas orbits mentioned above, naturally lead to the observed trend and scatter. To me this is another hint that such modelling errors are the leading effect that we're seeing in observational studies, but doesn't rule out that there might be signatures of interesting physics like cores created by supernova feedback or dark matter scattering interactions to be found once the models are cleaned up.

### Supernova feedback-driven dark matter cores as an explanation

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/eta_eta_roper.png" class="img-fluid rounded" width="65%" caption="Rotation curve shape parameter, η<sub>rot</sub>, as a function of central baryon-to-total mass fraction η<sub>bar</sub>. The solid black line shows the average η<sub>rot</sub> expected for NFW cusps and the grey band shwos corresponding 10-90&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent scatter. Upper panel: the square symbols are measured from the circular velocity curves (derived from the gravitational acceleration field in the disc mid-plane) of 21 simulated galaxies with a low gas density threshold (LT) for star formation. For each galaxy, there are 24 points for measurements derived from 24 rotation curves, one for each of 24 sightlines used to mock-observe each of them, with one orientation for each galaxy corresponding to the points outlined in black. These give an impression of the range in rotation curve shapes which might be measured given the intrinsic shapes reflected by the square markers. Darker and lighter error bars show median fractional uncertainties for galaxy subsamples with V<sub>max</sub><75&nbsp;km&nbsp;s<sup>-1</sup> and V<sub>max</sub>>75&nbsp;km&nbsp;s<sup>-1</sup>, respectively. Crosses show measurements derived from rotation curves of a selectoin of observed galaxies. Lower panel: as upper panel, but for 11 simulated galaxies with a high gas density threshold (HT) for star formation. Even though the circular velocity curves (square markers) lie in a distinct region of this parameter space relative to the LT galaxies, once the 'observational scatter' is included (points), the distributions overlap much more." %}