---
layout: page-distill
title: quantum free fall
description: masters thesis
img: /assets/img/quantfreefall.jpg
importance: 2

bibliography: master_thesis_ref.bib
comments: true
---

The title of my theis was `Weak equivalence principle in the quantum regime: Compatibility with quantum mechanics, and tunneling effects via the different quantizations of the time of arrival operator`. This was done by constructing the time of arrival (TOA) operator for a non-relativistic <d-footnote>We emphasize that our calculations only involve non-relativistic quantum mechanics in the weak gravity regime to avoid possible complications that may arise when considering relativistic particles. Depending on the energy of the particle, there is a possibility that particle creation and annihilation will occur. The concept of time of arrival then loses meaning since we are not sure if the particle that arrived is the same particle that was fired from the initial point. </d-footnote> and structureless particle that is projected upward in a uniform gravitational field with an intended arrival point below the classical turning point. Various TOA operators were constructed using supraquantization <sup><d-cite key="galapon2002pauli,galapon2002self"></d-cite></sup> (inspired by the works of Mackey <sup><d-cite key="mackey"></d-cite></sup>), and quantization by Weyl, Born-Jordan, and simple symmetric ordering rules, and compare their effects on the motion of the projectile. The expectation value of the TOA operators are explicitly shown to be equal to the classical time of arrival plus mass-dependent quantum correction terms, implying incompatibility of the WEP <d-footnote>The weak equivalence principle (WEP) in the quantum regime has been the subject of many studies with a broad range of approaches to the problem <sup><d-cite key="viola1997testing,davies2004quantum,ali2006quantum"></d-cite></sup>. Viola and Onofrio proposed testing the equivalence principle through freely falling quantum objects using the Ehrenfest theorem to compute the average time of flight (TOF) of a falling quantum particle. They found that due to the linearity of the potential, the average TOF equals that of the classical TOF. However, there was mass dependence on the width of the
TOF distribution. The same problem was treated by Davies using a quantum clock analysis, specifically a Peres clock, to the motion of a quantum particle in a stationary state in a gravitational field. Davies showed that there is a mass-dependent quantum correction term to the classical TOF due to tunneling. Nonetheless, the quantum TOF approaches the classical TOF for measurements far from the classical turning point. He took this as a quantum manifestation of the weak equivalence principle. Ali, et al. treated the same problem via the Bohmian-trajectory aprroach and showed that there is mass dependence on both
the position detection probabilities, and the mean arrival time. The WEP was then recovered in the limit of large mass.</d-footnote> with quantum mechanics. The full extent of the violation of the WEP is shown through the mass dependence of TOA distributions of the projectile for all the constructed TOA operators.

I was able to publish a paper on [Physical Review A](https://journals.aps.org/pra/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.042113) and two conference proceedings from this thesis. I also presented part of this thesis during the poster session of the conference "[Time and Fundamentals of Quantum Mechanics](http://www.weizmann.ac.il/conferences/TFQM19/)" <d-footnote><a href="https://www.facebook.com/photo?fbid=10214215256363882&set=t.1488933456">Here</a> is a picture of me with Y. Aharonov during the conference 😄</d-footnote>.