---
layout: post
title: '"Continuum" Supports Distributed Scientists In Intensive Collaborative Sessions'
date: 2004-04-26
tags: event
categories: events
tabs: true
---

Specially equipped rooms in a business headquarters used for conferences and planning, often referred to as war rooms, contain media intended to support or facilitate intense problem solving sessions. While flip-style tablets and white boards have long given way to computer technology and videoconferencing, these rooms remain largely self-contained. Researchers at University of Illinois at Chicago&rsquo;s Electronic Visualization Laboratory (EVL) have developed a high-tech war room for scientists called the Continuum, where distributed collaborators solve problems assisted by advanced collaboration, computation and visualization technologies backed by PC clusters connected over gigabit networks.<br><br>

At this year&rsquo;s National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) Private Sector Program Annual Meeting April 26-28, EVL associate professor Jason Leigh and Ph.D. student Allan Spale will demonstrate three core technologies of the Continuum Project - GeoWall, TeraVision and Access Grid.<br><br>

EVL&rsquo;s Continuum Project aims to develop integrated ubiquitous tools environments to enhance collaboration. These include interactive stereoscopic displays, multi-site audio / video conferencing, and high-resolution tiled displays.<br><br>

&ldquo;We want to understand how to build rooms with walls made of high-resolution displays capable of both stereoscopic and monoscopic projection - allowing scientists and decision makers to see all of their data, all of the time,&rdquo; said Leigh. &ldquo;We believe display-rich environments are a powerful way to enhance group awareness in distance collaborations. It&rsquo;s something that today&rsquo;s basic video conferencing tools have great difficulty conveying.&rdquo;<br><br>

Working in a collaborative session between EVL in Chicago, the Technology Research, Education, and Commercialization Center (TRECC) in DuPage County and Beckman Institute in University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), Leigh and Spale will operate two applications, MAEviz and ImmersaView.<br><br>

MAEviz is an interactive visualization tool for earthquake risk assessment developed by UIUC&rsquo;s Mid-America Earthquake Center (MAE Center) in collaboration with NCSA. ImmersaView is an EVL-developed tool for viewing stereoscopic three-dimensional data sets on the GeoWall, its portable, passive-stereo projection system.<br><br>

Graphics from MAEviz will be streamed to the collaborators at NCSA and TRECC using EVL&rsquo;s TeraVision, a system for real-time high-resolution graphics distribution. The AccessGrid will provide videocasting as well as a standardized environment for launching collaborative applications such as ImmersaView.<br><br>

&ldquo;Our goal with the Continuum Project is to make long-distance partnerships more productive,&rdquo; said Tom Prudhomme, Senior Associate Director of NCSA&rsquo;s Cybercommunities Directorate and the leader of the TRECC project. &ldquo;Continuum combines the hardware, software, networks, and techniques that can enable researchers and knowledge workers to transcend geographic boundaries.&rdquo;<br><br>

TRECC, located at the DuPage County Airport, is a UIUC program funded by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) and administered by NCSA. It supports innovative research in advanced information technologies and their application for the Navy R&amp;D community. It also provides the DuPage business and education communities access to next-generation technologies and commercialization opportunities.<br><br>

NCSA&rsquo;s Private Sector Program provides a competitive edge to American companies, allowing them to access the emerging technologies and innovations developed by NCSA and its partners. Through partnerships with leading-edge companies, NCSA ensures that its developments address real-world challenges. The current industrial partners are Allstate, Boeing, Caterpillar, Motorola and Sears.<br><br>

<em>The NCSA Private Sector Program meeting takes place April 26-28 at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&rsquo;s Beckman Institute.</em><br><br>

<strong>About the Electronic Visualization Laboratory (EVL):</strong><br>
EVL is an interdisciplinary laboratory offering degrees in computer science and art, and specializing in virtual reality over high-speed networks. Located at the University of Illinois at Chicago, EVL&rsquo;s funded research projects include tele-immersion and collaboration software, the development of viable, scalable, deployable stereo displays, and management of next-generation advanced networking initiatives. For the past several years, EVL has been conducting research in next-generation VR devices, to construct variable resolution and desktop/office-sized displays.<br><br>

<strong>About the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA):</strong><br>
NCSA is a national high-performance computing center that develops and deploys cutting-edge computing, networking and information technologies. Located at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign UIUC), NCSA is funded by the National Science Foundation. Additional support comes from the state of Illinois, the University of Illinois, private sector partners and other federal agencies.<br><br>

<strong>For More Information Please Contact:</strong><br>
Trish Barker<br>
National Center for Supercomputing Applications<br>
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign