---
layout: page_project
title: PH3407 - Introduction to Plasma Physics
description: An undergraduate level course, offered in semester 2 every year
contact: [Zhisong]
img: assets/img/teaching/PH3407.jpeg
importance: 1
category: NTU
---

### Overview

Plasma, also known as the “fourth state of matter”, is common in the universe: more than 90% of the baryonic matter in the universe is believed to be in the plasma state. The application space is also huge: solar physics, astrophysics, nuclear fusion reactor, industrial plasma processing (including semiconductor etching), space propulsion, etc. The area of study has a general appeal to many students, as they may decide to pursue a further study or take an internship in a related area. The proposed course would equip the students with the basic concepts and methodologies of plasma physics for various applications.

### Course Contents
1. What is a plasma?
   - Plasma frequency, Debye length, and quasi-neutrality
   - Natural plasmas, laboratory plasmas, and their parameters
2. Fluid description of plasmas
   - Derivation of the fluid equations
   - Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
3. Plasma waves in homogenous media
   - Linearisation of the fluid equations
   - Waves in unmagnetized plasmas
   - Waves in magnetized plasmas
   - Alfvén waves
4.	Plasma equilibrium
   - MHD equilibrium
   - Equilibrium in simple geometries, astrophysics objects, and fusion devices
5.	Stability
   - Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities
   - Tearing instabilities, magnetic reconnections, solar flare
   - Other important instabilities in natural and lab plasmas
6.	Kinetic theory
   - Plasma as a distribution function
   - The Vlasov equation, fluid equation derivation revisit
   - Landau damping
7.	Plasmas in a strong magnetic field
   - Guiding centre drift in uniform E and B fields
   - Guiding centre drift in non-uniform and time-varying fields
   - Adiabatic invariants
   - Drift ordering
8. Collisions and transport
   - Coulomb collisions, neutral collisions
   - Plasma resistivity
   - Diffusion and transport
9. Applications
   - Solar and astrophysical plasmas, nuclear fusion reactor, industrial plasmas, etc

### Reading and References
- Chen, F. F. (2015). Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion.
- Choudhuri, A. R. (1998). The physics of fluids and plasmas: an introduction for astrophysicists.
- Goldston, R. J. and Rutherford, P. H. (1995). Introduction to plasma physics.

Figure: By ESO/VPHAS+ team - http://www.eso.org/public/images/eso1403a/, CC BY 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=30759954