---
layout: post
title: '"Simulation and Comparison of Cost, Priority and FCFS Scheduling Schemes Over an Adaptive Network Model"'
date: 2002-06-01
tags: paper
categories: papers
tabs: true
---

## Simulation and Comparison of Cost, Priority and FCFS Scheduling Schemes Over an Adaptive Network Model
**Ramaraju, B.P., Theys, M.D.**
- PDF: [theyssimulation.pdf](/documents/theyssimulation.pdf)
Scheduling Data Requests is a highly researched topic in the field of Networks. Many optimal Scheduling Algorithms have been developed and effectively implemented. The advent of the Internet has brought revolutionary changes in the design of the Schedulers. The manner in which data gets carried over the networks has also changed. No longer is the Internet thought of as a Network used only by Intellectuals. It has become the common mans gateway to the world. With the advancement of technology the Internet became the carrier of a plethora of different Data types that include Video, Audio, Voice, Graphics, etc.<br><br>

To support these high-end applications significant changes have been made to the way traffic is handled over the Internet. Scheduling has become very crucial to use the Network Bandwidth effectively. Some applications require a specific amount of Bandwidth to be reserved for them at scheduled times. Prioritization of Client Requests has to be made to ensure support for such Scheduling. The project aims at designing and simulating a component of a proposed Distributed Scheduler, which schedules the client requests based on a COST Function. We intend to compare and contrast the COST based scheduling environment with a PRIORITY based and a FirstComeFirstServe (FCFS) scheduling scheme. Based upon results, guidelines for further research in the area of Distributed Scheduling will be provided.