---
layout: post
title: a post with math
date: 2015-10-20 11:12:00-0400
description: an example of a blog post with some math
---
This theme supports rendering beautiful math in inline and display modes using [KaTeX](https://khan.github.io/KaTeX/) engine. You just need to surround your math expression with `$$`, like `$$ E = mc^2 $$`. If you leave it inside a paragraph, it will produce an inline expression, just like $$ E = mc^2 $$.

To use display mode, again surround your expression with `$$` and place it as a separate paragraph. Here is an example:

$$
\left( \sum_{k=1}^n a_k b_k \right)^2 \leq \left( \sum_{k=1}^n a_k^2 \right) \left( \sum_{k=1}^n b_k^2 \right)
$$


To use the aligned multiple lines, use:

```
$$
\begin{aligned}
f(x) &= 1 \\
	 & \neq 2.
\end{aligned}
$$
```
This gives:

$$
\begin{aligned}
f(x) &= 1 \\
& \neq 2.
\end{aligned}
$$


### Math notes 

#### 1. The contractive property of the nearest-point projection is a special property of Hilbert spaces.

By [user53153's answer](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/282034/do-projections-onto-convex-sets-always-decrease-distances)

* Suppose $$(M, d)$$ is some $$\ell_p$$ metric space (not necessarily Euclidean), and $$C \subseteq M$$ is a closed convex set. Consider the projection function $$f_C:M\rightarrow C$$ defined such that:
$$f_C(x) \in \arg\min_{y \in C} d(x,y)$$
Is it the case that for all $$x,y \in M$$:
$$d(f_c(x),f_c(y)) \leq d(x,y)$$
i.e., is it the case that projections onto convex sets can never increase the distance between a pair of points?

* Answering a follow-up question, I add a proof of the contractive property in Hilbert spaces. 
Let $$P$$ be projection onto a closed convex set $$C$$, and consider $$a'=P(a)$$ and $$b'=P(b)$$.
Since the segment $$a'b'$$ is contained in $$C$$, we have $$\|(1-t)a'+tb'-a\|\ge \|a'-a\|$$ for $$t\in [0,1]$$.
Therefore, 
$$
0 \leq \frac{d}{dt} \|(1-t)a'+tb'-a\|^2 \bigg\vert_{t=0} = 2 \langle b'-a' , a'-a \rangle.
$$
Similarly, 
$$
\langle a'-b' , b'-b \rangle \ge 0.
$$ 
Now consider the function
$$
d(t)=\|(1-t)a'+ta - ((1-t)b'+tb)\|^2 = \|(a'-b') + t (a-a'-b+b') \|^2
$$
which is a quadratic polynomial with nonnegative coefficient of $$t^2$$. From (1) and (2) we have
$$
d\,'(0) = 2 \langle a'-b' , a-a'-b+b' \rangle \ge 0 
$$
Therefore $$d$$ is increasing on $$[0,\infty)$$. In particular, $$d(1)\ge d(0)$$ which means 
$$\|a-b\|\ge \|a'-b'\|.$$


### Convex optimazition

* A function $$g: \mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}$$ is $$L$$-smooth if and only if it is twice differentiable and 
 $$
 \forall \theta \in \mathbb{R}^d, \quad \nabla^2 g(\theta) \preccurlyeq L I_d. 
 $$

* The function is $$\mu$$-strongly convex if and only if 
$$
g(x_1) \geq g(x_2) + \langle \nabla g(x_2) , x_1 - x_2 \rangle + \frac{\mu}{2} \lVert x_1 - x_2 \rVert^2.
$$

* A function $$g$$ is $$L$$-smooth and $$\mu$$-strongly convex if $$\mu I_d \preccurlyeq \nabla^2 g(x) \preccurlyeq L I_d.$$



Note that [KaTeX](https://khan.github.io/KaTeX/) is work in progress, so it does not support the full range of math expressions as, say, [MathJax](https://www.mathjax.org/). Yet, it is [blazing fast](http://www.intmath.com/cg5/katex-mathjax-comparison.php).

