---
layout: post
title:  Funny Masters' Stories
date:   2019-07-07
description: Just some fun nonsense..
---
When I joined my MS program in UBC, I figured I was super prepared. But why? - Well, I had read literally every Ph.D. guide that can perhaps exist. I kid you not. Philip Guo, Matt Might, UNC guides etc. etc. etc. I was under the impression I know everything and ofc that made me the biggest idiot on this planet. Since I assumed I already know everything. (wait for the irony).

Anyway, when my grad school I started working. I worked hard. (At least I feel I worked hard) I forgot about all those guides, list of mistakes and every other thing I had ever read. However, recently I was reorganizing my bookmarked pages(yes I do random stuff like this when I am super bored). I stumbled upon some of the articles and guides I had read before starting my master's program. I started laughing. I think I was laughing for at least 15 mins and I was literally smiling the entire time while writing this post. It was hilarious.

I realized I had literally done everything on those lists I was NOT supposed to do. Writing this post is super tough for me at this point since I can’t help laughing at my stupidity. I mean I have made EVERY mistake these guides mention not to!!!!!!!!! I mean how is that even remotely possible??

The first article I re-read was this (http://www.cs.unc.edu/~azuma/hitch4.html). One point mentioned is don’t spend much time on courses. Well, when I arrived here, I took three research courses in my second term. The reason was I was infatuated by those courses. Honestly, I was. I wanted to see what different areas hav to offer. However, being in such courses and learning from such amazing people was something that allured me. Before joining my graduate studies, I didn’t even know what formal verification was!!!! After my one verification course, I wanted to know what all do I not know exists. For students who have taken amazing courses in their bachelors, this is perhaps super redundant. But, hey I had standard courses in my undergrad. My undergrad university was not research-intensive. It was a good school but their courses were more job oriented. Though I always took maths electives, this was something very very different.

Then the next book I re-read was Philip Guo and damn it, I literally made the same mistakes he made in his first initial years. I isolated myself for two months in the middle because I assumed my productivity decreases with humans around me(IKR?).

Instead of sticking to one topic, I tried literally everything I could get my hands on. What did I not try? I started running tools and reading papers and finding a few flaws with them. Then what? - I moved on the next verification paper or tool abandoning this tool!!!!!!

In between, there was a period when I thought I thought I have everything figured out in my head. Hence, I was procrastinating the writing process. However, when I started writing, the number of gaps were numerous in my thinking. Man, I messed up.

However, despite whatever nonsense I did in this past year, these are the things I actually do not regret, I mean most people learn these lessons in their second or third year of their Ph.D. program. I  did all of them in my first year of Masters itself. (The only way to look at  things in an optimistic manner xP)

I aimed for these super duper ambitious projects and now when I look at my previous notes, they are some really good topics but they are all a Ph.D. thesis in itself. I was thinking I will do it all in my Masters. What the hell was I even thinking? I now feel that my advisor was pretty patient towards me based on the stuff I have been doing.

Another thing about which I am really glad I did was, I tried numerous types of research projects to get a feel of what researching in that area would feel like if I decide to do a Ph.D. in that area. For example, if you are in core theory, you will always be thinking about proofs for doing something for which maybe into the future there will be a lot of use. These people are really hopeful and do good work and I guess enjoy the abstractions process and I really loved this aspect of the work. However, there is a huge gap in terminologies. Every country has different terminology, inside every country, every group has different sets of terminologies. Hence, you really need a strong advisor in this case who can point you to the right material so that you don’t get lost and confused and drown in different terminologies.

Then, there are system based project, where damn it installing the application itself consumes half of your lifetime. When it finally runs after investing 100 years on it, it’s a bitter-sweet feeling, bitter because - hey man 100 years of my life are gone, and sweet because -hey I installed it finally. However, you are working with real systems, and looking deeply into the stuff that people need and are utilizing these days. So if you are the sort of person who wants to change the world then hey systems is the place to be. Also, if you are more of business minded person, again systems are the place to be.

However, I guess the project which was the most enjoyable for me, was understanding the system and abstracting it out mathematically and understanding the science and logic behind why is that system failing. Why is it not secure or why is it not following the specs properly. I don’t care what type of system it about but just understanding deeply what a system is asking out of you and why do we even need such a system. A very interesting area, in this case, is the world of a cyber-physical system. These systems also involve some sense of humans being involved which makes it more interesting to work on.  Back to the point, abstracting real systems and understanding why they go wrong and fail and bridging the gap between developers and testers and security engineers is something I find super interesting right now.

However, after all the mistakes and more to come(if there are any more I haven’t done already) I realized I am the sort of person who enjoys bridging gaps. I like understanding different aspects of looking at a system and connecting them.

I guess this was always me, I have loved connecting most random things with next set of random things since forever.
For eg. it took me back to my first music theory class. This was the time when I was fourth or fifth grade and my sir was introducing the notion of musical scales (major, minor etc. etc.). Anyway, he gave us one scale and he told us to play it. It was C-major. He then told us, can you connect it with something from what we have played on the guitar previously and I noticed that hey the C-major chord is the 1st. The 3rd and 5th note of the major scale and I told him that this is a pattern, every major scale can be built this way. This was it, then he gave us the general major scale formula. Point is I have always liked connecting things. Then I  really got interested in connecting music to maths. The more I googled the more information I found. However, this all began when I got obsessed with the Fibonacci series. I started noticing 3 and five everywhere and in the scales too. I have not googled much about it because sometimes googling stuff ruins my interests. They give too much information and make stuff robotic.

Anyway, my point is I guess I don’t care about inventing something new or novel anymore, I just want to connect things. Connect the existing knowledge and understand where it fails. Why are these partitions? Why are the research ideologies of every area people are so different? In the past year, I have spoken to verification experts, PL folks, systems folks, and industry-oriented folks. However, even inside verification, I have spoken to people who think the theory is nonsense. I have heard quotes from theory folks such as “If you are not spending time doing gradual typing you are wasting your life”. It’s super interesting and funny to hear people talk about these things at times. But, I honestly, don’t think I will enjoy being a person with one of those ideologies. I just want to connect things. That is something I feel I am good at and I enjoy doing that. Perhaps I would like to be called as a connector of things. Hmm…is that even a thing?

Well, I am glad that after making all these mistakes I could at least get an answer to a very empirical question which is - What do I really enjoy in research. Simple answer - I like connecting stuff (yey).


In about a month (26th July 2019), it will be exactly one year since I started my journey and learned so much along the year. This has been a heck of a year….PHEW!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

LESSON: NO MATTER HOW MUCH YOU READ, YOU ARE NOT GOING TO LEARN UNTIL YOU MAKE THE MISTAKES ON YOUR OWN!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
