---
layout: post
title: 2 Worldly Philosophers
date: 2019-05-16 18:59:00-0400
description: 2 Worldly Philosophers blog post with comments
comments: false
---

Book review. 222The worldly philosophers by Robert L Heilbroner.

If memory serves me well, I learn about The wordily philosophers, form Cristof Koch.
Recently, I read a reference about the book that prompt me tor read it. It was Robert Lucas or some other laissez fair economist in a book that contains the autobiographic account f some of the most important economist, all of them awarded with the Bank of Sweden version of the Nobel prize. There Lucas made the statement that he found no interest in Heilbroner's book because he though it was nothing to do with economics. He had no time for political scientist, which is how economist where called before the mathematization of math led by Robert Samuelson that started in the later 40s and 50s of the past century.

The wordily philosophers is certainly t the book that would grant you tenure at The University of Chicago Dept of economics, Samuleson's Principles of Economics did for Lucas on his own account. The book however gives for the most part well balanced and insightful descriptions of the men (alas, alas) that created, shaped and push forward, right and left the discipline of economics.

_The lives, times and ideas of the great economic thinkers_, such as the subtitle of the book, includes Smith, Malthus, Ricardo, the Utopian Socialists, Marx, Victorian economists, Veblen and ends with Keynes and Galbraith. 
