---
layout: post
title:  What's the point of networking?
date:   2019-06-28
description: Why do we need to network? I just don't see the point.
---
In the past two months, I have had the opportunity(thanks to travel grants and my supervisor’s LORs) to attend two top conferences - one in Software Engineering (ICSE’19) and another in Programming Languages (PLDI’19). However, this post is not about what you should or should not do in conferences, it’s more about expressing my concern about the concept of “networking”.

The first conference which I attended was ICSE during May end and the first day was mostly spent on attending the student mentoring workshop. It was all the rockstars of their field talking about do's and don’ts. I guess a couple of things were helpful but there was one point which was being repeated consistently and it seemed to be a little confusing for me - Go network. I mean honestly what is that even supposed to mean. Why must I small talk with people, just for the sake of networking, it doesn't really make much sense to me. Suppose I have some legit concern or doubt regarding someone’s research I can always mail and ask them. A lot of people say that researchers usually do not respond to emails however, in my experience, if its a legit mail with real concerns/questions people do respond. It’s been very rare that I have not received a response from someone I sent out a mail to with a real question. Also, if you are a student volunteer and/or a first-time attendee with no papers or poster what are you even supposed to network about?

Perhaps the real use of a conference will be more visible to me once I have a paper published and I am getting all geared up to give a talk. In ICSE’19 since the venue was amazing, I utilized the breaks to in fact get my work done. The big question is what do I really get out of talking to a person and knowing about his/her research when I can always see it on their webpages? - Well, some might say that not everyone has the time to update their websites regularly and I would like to counter that by saying - if that was the case there is a very high probability they would not have attended the conference either (super introverts). Also, with google scholar and DBLP, it’s honestly really easy to know an authors’ recent work.  This brings me back to this huge question - why is there an incessant need to go and interact with every person you see at a conference?

I was told by a very wise woman this joke at PLDI’19. Since I could not decide what all to attend one fine morning at PLDI, I kept hopping between rooms for literally the entire morning. By lunchtime, I was super drained and the wise -lady (she’s been a part of PLDI, POPL, and SPLASH for over 10 years now) came to me and asked why am I not attending any more sessions and I told her that I am mentally drained because of all the hopping. She asked a question - what do you think is the most important session in a conference? - What did I reply...umm depends on your interests? - She said “the hallway/lobby” session. Again, I was a little surprised, however, by the end of the conference I realized this one thing - people actually come here to network!!

Honestly, it still does not make sense to me. Why should I travel so much just to network? I feel as a young student just entering the research world, I should be more concerned about learning and understanding things in depth. Perhaps for more mature researchers and professors attending and networking makes a little more sense (perhaps!!). However, as a super newbie into all this, it seems a little wrong to attend such conferences. I feel super fake.

I relate all this to a very simple analogy. A student joins a guitar class and attends his/her first session. Instead of being taught how to play the guitar and the basics of musical theory, they are taught how to pose with a guitar by standing in front of the mirror. The reason being - learn to look cool to show it to the world, you can always learn the “stuff” along the way.

I felt like that student, attending my guitar class for the first time and instead of being taught the basics I was being taught how to present myself and that did not make me feel comfortable about myself. Maybe I am super immature to understand the necessity of all these aspects but I hope these things make sense to me someday.
