---
layout:     post
title:      C++ Toolchain with Taint Analysis
date:       2020-02-24 08:00
summary:    Complete build of LLVM tools with dataflow sanitizer (dfsan).
categories: c++
tags:       [c++, llvm, taint]
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

Clang comes with a set of tools known as _sanitizers_ that provide a runtime
verification of common problems such as memory issues and undefined behavior.
An interesting and a not well-known one is DfSan, a dataflow sanitizer. The name
does not really reveal the true purpose: the library brings a compiler pass
and runtime to implement **taint analysis**[^1]. The main purpose is to **taint**
specific memory regions and automatically propagate taint labels to other locations
in memory that are affected by originally tainted regions. Taint labels are stored
separately, in a so-called shadow memory, and compiler pass instruments codes
with taint propagation. Thus, it is possible for every variable in a program to detect
which values have affected it. The analysis is not only fully inter-procedural
but it is completely memory agnostic, which is a common issue for static compiler
analyses. The sanitizer implements **data-flow tainting**, the most common way of propagating labels:

```c

void f(int * x)
{
  // Taint label input_parameter detected in y!
  int y = *x;
  do_something_important(y);
}

int input_parameter = 1;
taint(&input_parameter, "input_parameter");
int x = input_parameter * 10;
f(&x);
```

As a sidenote, we notice that variables can be affected through control-flow
decision as well:

```c
int m, n;
taint(&m, "m");
taint(&n, "n");
int sum = 0;
// sum is m * n
// sum should have both `m` and `n` as taint labels
for(int i = 0; i < m; ++i)
  sum += n;
```

The feature of control-flow tainting[^2] has not been implemented in DfSan yet.

To be fully precise, DfSan needs to instrument all library functions by propagating taint labels across
function arguments and return values. As a result, it creates a wrapper function
for each function found in the program. When handling functions that cannot be
instrumented, e.g. library functions for which only declaration is available,
the function will be considered as potentially problematic unless dfsan is
notified through an ABI blacklist that this function does not write into
user-accessible memory. For such function there can be no taint propagation or
the taint label of return value from the function is overapproximated as a combination
of taint labels in all input variables.

To make sure that we cover everything, we have to instrument all libraries
used by the program, including the standard C++ library.

### Goal

The main goal is to assemble a complete C++ toolchain with a support for
dataflow (taint) analysis. According to Clang documentation[^3],
the complete pipeline includes not only a compiler,
but a linker, language standard library implementation and a runtime library. 
First, we're going to [build Clang with compiler runtime](#build-clang-with-sanitizers). Afterwards, we're 
going to use the new build of clang to [prepare sanitized build of libc++](#c-standard-library).
Finally, we build libunwind, the library implementing stack unwinding which
is necessary for exception handling, and [assemble the toolchain in a Docker
image ](#complete-toolchain) to form a single distribution of a C++ dfsan pipeline.
To demonstrate the tool usability for HPC
software, we're going to take a look on builds with [OpenMP](#openmp) and [MPI](#mpi).

### Shared libraries

Static libraries are prefered for dfsan to avoid issues with memory mappings.
However, statical link of libraries might lead to serious issues when a specific
library is linked more than once. For example, an application might link
both OpenMP and a library already using OpenMP, leading to a scenario where
two OpenMP runtimes are present. That could have catastrophic effects on the
performance but it's not something that we should worry about when trying to instrument an application[^4].


### Using DfSan

Dfsan might produce a huge number of warnings related on uninstrumented functions.
It's quite benefitial to look through the log at least. Although a significant part
of libc is uninstrumented and `sqrt` computing square root is marked as functional, implying
that taint label of return value is infered from labels of input arguments,
the cubic root function `cbrt` is marked only as `uninstrumented`.
Afterwards it's better to disable the output log entirely with the environment
variable:

```
DFSAN_OPTIONS=warn_unimplemented=0
```

## Build Clang with sanitizers

First, we need to get LLVM and clang with the support to sanitizers - we're
going to use dataflow sanitizer (dfsan). There are three ways to achieve that:
* get prebuilt packages via APT for Debian-based systems: https://apt.llvm.org/
* build from sources, starting with cloning the [repository](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project)
and switching to branch corresponding to selected release
* download sources or prebuilt binaries from [sources](http://releases.llvm.org/download.html).
The important part is we need to build Clang with compiler-rt since the latter
provides sanitizers.

The build itself is quite straightforward as long as all projects
are placed together, just like in a clone from directory, or in a common directory
i.e. with directories `clang` and `compiler-rt` along `LLVM`. The CMake configuration
with sanitizers and in release mode is as follows:

```bash
cmake -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="X86"\
  && -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="clang;compiler-rt"\
  && -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release\
  && -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/path/to/install\
  && /path/to/llvm
```

We can use dataflow sanitizer to propagate taint labels in a dataflow manner!
We do a sanity check by running a shortened version of the [simple example from docs](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/DataFlowSanitizer.html):

```c++
#include <sanitizer/dfsan_interface.h>
#include <assert.h>

int main(void)
{
  int i = 1;
  dfsan_label i_label = dfsan_create_label("i", 0);
  dfsan_set_label(i_label, &i, sizeof(i));

  int j = 2;
  dfsan_label j_label = dfsan_create_label("j", 0);
  dfsan_set_label(j_label, &j, sizeof(j));

  int test = i + j;
  dfsan_label test_label = dfsan_read_label(&test, sizeof(test));
  assert(dfsan_has_label(test_label, i_label));
  assert(dfsan_has_label(test_label, j_label));

  return 0;
}
```

Which can be built with just a single additional compiler flag:

```bash
export PATH=/install/path/bin:$PATH
# make sure we use the correct version
which clang++
clang++ -fsanitize=dataflow dfsan_test.cpp -o dfsan_test.exe
./dfsan_test.exe
```

The **Docker image** with the complete build is available as [`mcopik/clang-dfsan:clang-${VERSION}`](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/mcopik/clang-dfsan/tags).

## C++ Standard Library

We want to build both [libcxx](https://libcxx.llvm.org/) and [libcxxabi](https://libcxxabi.llvm.org/)
to provide a fully sanitized standard library implementation that can be used
by C++ applications. The libraries are easily built as a part of LLVM tree by
selectin LLVM projects `libcxx` and `libcxxabi`, similarly to the previous setup.
However, this requires generation of targets for the entire LLVM project and
we can't easily reuse previous build step because compiler flags are now different.

Fortunately, the libraries support a standalone build although it is a bit more complicated
due to a cyclic dependency: `libcxx` requires `libcxxabi` whereas `libcxxabi` requires existence of `libcxx`
headers. The most generic approach would be to build `libcxx` against a different ABI,
such as `libstdc++`, build `libcxxabi` and then finally rebuild `libcxx` with a proper
ABI. But we can take a shortcut here since `libcxxabi` requires only headers
from the other library, and for that reason we don't need a full build.

First, let's create a static build of `libcxxabi`

```bash
cmake -G "Ninja"\
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=MinSizeRel\
  -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/path/to/install\
  -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang\
  -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++\
  -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS=-fsanitize=dataflow\
  -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-fsanitize=dataflow\
  -DLLVM_PATH=/path/to/llvm/install\
  -DLIBCXXABI_ENABLE_SHARED=NO\
  -DLIBCXXABI_LIBCXX_PATH=../libcxx\
  ../libcxxabi
```

This will create a single static library file `lib/libc++abi.a`. Then, we can
get a libc++. In addition, we can use the experimental option `LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY`
to link the contents of `libcxxabi` with our static copy of `libcxx`. This simplifies
further usage since `libc++abi.a` does not have to be specified every time as link-time
dependency.

```bash
cmake -G "Ninja"\
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=MinSizeRel\
  -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/opt/llvm\
  -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang\
  -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++\
  -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS=-fsanitize=dataflow\
  -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-fsanitize=dataflow\
  -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED=OFF\
  -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libcxxabi\
  -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY=ON\
  -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS=../libcxxabi/include/\
  -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH=../build_libcxxabi/lib/\
  ../libcxx
```

Afterwards we should only `libc++.a` in the `${INSTALL}/lib`
directory. Let's do a simple sanity check to verify that our new build works
correctly:

```c++
#include <vector>
#include <numeric>
#include <cassert>

#include <sanitizer/dfsan_interface.h>

int main(void)
{

  int i = 1;
  dfsan_label i_label = dfsan_create_label("i", 0);
  dfsan_set_label(i_label, &i, sizeof(i));

  int j = 2;
  dfsan_label j_label = dfsan_create_label("j", 0);
  dfsan_set_label(j_label, &j, sizeof(j));

  std::vector<int> vec{1, 2, i};
  dfsan_label test_label = dfsan_read_label(&vec.at(2), sizeof(int));
  assert(dfsan_has_label(test_label, i_label));

  int test = std::accumulate(vec.begin(), vec.end(), j);
  test_label = dfsan_read_label(&test, sizeof(test));
  assert(dfsan_has_label(test_label, i_label));
  assert(dfsan_has_label(test_label, j_label));

  return 0;
}
```

To build this, we need to specify in clang arguments that `libc++` should be used.
Furthermore, we need to provide include and library directories to libc++, unless
the standard library was installed in the same directory tree as clang.
In such case, the compiler will be able to pick up paths automatically. The link
with `libc++abi` is unnecesary when libraries were merged in the last build step.

```bash
clang++ -I /path/to/libc++/installation/include/c++/v1\
  -fsanitize=dataflow\
  -L /path/to/libc++/installation/lib\
  -Wl,--start-group,-lc++abi\
  -stdlib=libc++ dfsan_test.cpp\
  -o dfsan_test.exe
```

The **Docker image** with the complete build is available as [`mcopik/clang-dfsan:libcxx-${VERSION}](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/mcopik/clang-dfsan/tags).

## Complete Toolchain

Finally, we can assemble a complete C++ toolchain. In addition to standard C++ library,
the compilation workflow has several dependencies such as linker, runtime library
or implementation of exceptions. One could use standard, widely-used and easily available
tools or try to build a pure LLVM pipeline.

### GCC

The required packages on a Ubuntu-based distro are **binutils** for standard GNU
linker **ld**, **libc-dev** for standard C library and **libgcc-${VERSION}-dev**
to provide runtime library and stack unwinder. Atomics require additional libraries[^2].

### Clang

On Debian-based distributions, I recommend to use **libc-6-dev** since it's
perfectly compatible with clang programs. The necessary runtime functions are
already provided with **compiler-rt**. Common alternatives to **GNU ld** linker
are **GNU gold** or **LLVM lld**.


Again, the **Docker image** with the complete build is available as [`mcopik/clang-dfsan:dfsan-${VERSION}`](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/mcopik/clang-dfsan/tags).
It comes with two wrappers, `clang-dfsan` and `clang++-dfsan`, that include
flags necessary to enable dataflow sanitization and link against dedicated build
of `libc++`.

## OpenMP

LLVM has a separate implementation of [OpenMP](https://openmp.llvm.org/), a widely-used library for multithreading
and shared-memory parallelism. The build steps are similar to other project, with minor
differences. First, an additional CMake parameter `LIBOMP_ENABLE_SHARED=Off` is
used to enforce building a static library. Second, there are several functions that cannot be instrumented because their
implementations are provided only in assembly. On Linux, these functions are provided in `runtime/src/z_Linux_asm.S`
and dfsan blacklist has to be updated:

```
fun:__kmp_x86_cpuid=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_x86_cpuid=discard
fun:__kmp_store_x87_fpu_control_word=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_store_x87_fpu_control_word=discard
fun:__kmp_load_x87_fpu_control_word=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_load_x87_fpu_control_word=discard
fun:__kmp_clear_x87_fpu_status_word=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_clear_x87_fpu_status_word=functional
fun:__kmp_hardware_timestamp=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_hardware_timestamp=discard

fun:__kmp_fork_call=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_fork_call=functional
fun:__kmp_serialized_parallel=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_serialized_parallel=functional
fun:__kmp_invoke_microtask=uninstrumented
fun:__kmp_invoke_microtask=functional
```

The library can be build similarly to the previous step:

```bash
cmake -G "Ninja"\
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=MinSizeRel\
  -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/opt/llvm\
  -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang\
  -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++\
  -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fsanitize=dataflow -fsanitize-blacklist=/dfsan_abilist.txt"\
  -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fsanitize=dataflow -fsanitize-blacklist=/dfsan_abilist.txt"\
  -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED=OFF\
  -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libcxxabi\
  -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY=ON\
  -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS=../libcxxabi/include/\
  -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH=../build_libcxxabi/lib/\
  ../libcxx
```

Finally, we can try to compile a program parallelized with OpenMP by adding the
flags `-I/path/to/openmp/include -fopenmp /path/to/openmp/lib/libiomp5.a`.

```c++
#include <vector>
#include <numeric>
#include <cassert>

#include <omp.h>

#include <sanitizer/dfsan_interface.h>

int main(void)
{

  int m = 1;
  dfsan_label m_label = dfsan_create_label("m", 0);
  dfsan_set_label(m_label, &m, sizeof(m));
  int n = 100;

  #pragma omp parallel
  {
    int * sum = new int[omp_get_num_threads()];
    #pragma omp for
    for(int i = 0; i < n; ++i)
      sum[omp_get_thread_num()] += m;
    dfsan_label test_label = dfsan_read_label(&sum[omp_get_thread_num()], sizeof(int));
    assert(dfsan_has_label(test_label, m_label));
    delete[] sum;
  }

  return 0;
}
```

## MPI

The MPI can be compiled with dfsan support, an example of build for OpenMPI:

```bash
CC=${CLANG} CFLAGS="-fsanitize=dataflow"\
  && ${OPENMPI_DIR}/configure\
  && --enable-static=yes\
  && --enable-shared=false
```

Compiling the library requires additional blacklist update because small assembly
functions are used during the configuration to test the compiler:

```
fun:gsym_test_func=uninstrumented
```

Apart from that change, the compilation should work seamlessly.
C++ compiler should be unnecessary because C++ bindings are deprecated and not built by default

An entirely different question is if instrumenting MPI is even necessary?
MPI operations tend to overwrite memory content with data received from network
and it requires an additional library to handle label propagation through MPI
messages. Furthermore, using a dedicated build prevents from running the program
on a supercomputer. Thus, a better option might be to simply put MPI functions in the
blacklist.

## References

[^1]: [Taint checking on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taint_checking)
[^2]: [Kang et al., "DTA++: Dynamic Taint Analysis withTargeted Control-Flow Propagation"](http://bitblaze.cs.berkeley.edu/papers/dta++-ndss11.pdf)
[^3]: [Clang: Assembling a Complete Toolchain](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/Toolchain.html)
[^4]: [January 2016, [Openmp-dev] Building a static LLVM OpenMP library?](http://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/openmp-dev/2016-January/001051.html)
