---
layout: post
title: Better relevant than right
date: 2020-04-02 11:59:00-0400
description: an example of a blog post with comments
comments: false  
---

George Box famously put it "All models are wrong some are useful", but he forgot to mention that others are harmful. The covid epidemic gives us insight about what this is so.
The book _The drunkard's book_ by the physicist Leonard Mlodinow, tells the story of OJ Simpson trial. Simpson's lawyer, the same hired by DJ Trump to take him off the hook this time of the impeachment process, convinced the jury that since the probability that if a woman is death the husband did it is low, the probability that Simpson murdered his wife was likewise low. While the fact is true it is however irrelevant. The relevant piece of information here is that given that a wife is found dead and the the husband has antecedents of beaten her up, the probability that the husband murdered the wife is high. Thus, _P(wife murdered, husband is the murderer)_ is low but the relevant probability is _P(wife murdered, husband is the murderer| husband is a wife's abuser)_. The jury, persuaded by the lawyer, failed to grasp the enormous difference between a true statement and a relevant one, and the accuser was acquitted. 

We may fail to know when we are wrong, but we are easily apt to point out to someone else wrongness, specially when we have the time in our favor. The hall of fame of famous pitfalls contains preferably large errors of famous people. For instance, Bill Gates "no more than 4k", Krugman "internet fax machine" or most recently the space entrepreneur and ubermensch a la mode Elon Musk "is dumb to  worry about the virus".
Admittedly, these misjudgments do not out and in themselves cause harm, the even might elicit pleasure to schodenfraude adepts and monday morning quarterbacking aficionados.
There are however, cases in which an opinion or idea from someone in a position of power or professional prestige, specially when deliver mediatically can result in great pain and suffering. The covid pandemia is a case in point. 

It is painful, as to efface any remain of teutonic schaudefrade, to watch today the admonitions and forecasts  of some experts in virology and public health just a few weeks before entire countries were shutdown and improvised morgues need to be settle to cope with the incessant number of deceased bodies at an astounding rate. Take for example, virologist Roberto and Italian Health Ministry in a prime tv national tv intervention that is painful to watch, the experti virologist ex catedra went as far as saying that the probability of contagion is 0, the young minister did not miss the occassion to pitch to the, in ligh of the events, credulous audience how well hospitals were prepared for any emergence raleted to virus. It is not necessary to add harm to injury with the country thta has suffered the most, blatantly wrong statements about the consequences of the epedemia are too many to list, the WHO "" is certainly not without blame. 
In the UK , models can be harmful.

So it must be cleara wrong model are not inocuous and can be lethal. But. it is enough to be right? No. Elon Musk, corrected his previous misjudmement and rightly said that a exponential curves do not oiccur in the natural world, he pointed out, and rightly so, that a realistic curve of contagion would look more like a sigmoid function, that is, the number of cases will grop fastly but it will reach a saturation poiint, a plateu, or in today's mediatic parlance the curve will have flatten. This indictment is precisely correct, any biological phenomemon can grow  exponetially unchecked, metabolic processes are necessrily bounded.
However, this is right but not relevant, notice that the curve will be a soigmoid is irrelevant what really matter is to be able to tell when the curve saturates, if it saturates at 8B people deaths human species means that humans in plaet earth have ceased to exist,on the other hand, if it saturates at 100K for those unaffected it will buisness as usual, and the narrative of economic recovery being an U or a V or a W will occupy economists and pundits, the l;letter model a perfect example of useless model.

We are left to being relevant, which is being right at the right time, in the previous example is telling not only that the curve is a sigmoid but when it saturates.
For that we need complex systems and non linear dynamics.

