---
layout: post
title:  cs @ cmu, first sem reflections
date:   2021-12-20 
description: Ah, wonderful journey :,)
tags: false
categories: uni
---
It’s currently winter break of 2021, I chose to take this time to reflect upon where I am, and where I have come from, and hopefully do a little something in my life. Hence, this website.

Let’s start by speaking of the semester.

I had to learn from many mistakes the hard way, and I had to mentally get pushed, CMU really squeezes every ounce of brain power you have till you are left with nothing but a mushy brain that needs a break.

It has been fun, and it’s been a semester of many firsts. My first fail in an exam. My first crying In a professors office. My first finishing homework minutes before its due. My first time staying up late to work on a project. This semester has left me inspired, and in love with the supportive community I have.

Carnegie Mellon, and university in general is filled with opportunities, it has been great meeting Professor after Professor, learning from them and their life stories. Embarking in the kindness they offered us and the mentorship they have provided. Not only them, I would like to extend a thank you to the course assistants who have taught me a lot, and helped me grow from my mistakes.

Looking back, there was a lot that I wished I could have done differently, but honestly, I wouldn’t have it any other way.

With time upon my hands I previously did not have much of (or rather poorly managed), I’m left to reflect upon life, what my hopes are and who it is I aspire to become.

Well, spoiler alert… I’ve got no idea, and I think it may be like this for a while.

For now I’ll simply enjoy the trip and what it has to offer, including its occasional hurdles.

Till next time! 