---
layout: post
title: On diversity, equity, and inclusion in science
date: 2021-01-01 11:12:00-0400
---
Diversity in academia is critical because scientific enquiry is most productive when the researchers are drawn from a variety of cultures and experiences. Diversity expands the frontier of human knowledge we are exploring as a community - people from varying backgrounds are motivated to study different problems. Additionally, it ensures that the fruits of effort are accessible to and benefit a greater portion of humanity. Systemic issues related to inclusivity and equity in institutions of science restrict the impact science can have in our world. While this seems bleak, I am optimistic that the scientific world will change to become more equitable. For that change, _everyone_ will have to look inward, understand their belief system, question it, explore how it impacts the world around them, and restructure it. And, this is hard work - the road (especially as a woman in computer science) is paved with self-doubt, self-victimization, and a persistent angst at 'the system'.

Being a woman in computer science (CS) is often fraught with severe internal conflicts. I was born and brought up in India, where, like the US, gender plays a huge role in what your community expects from you. In an extremely fortunate lottery, I was born to a family that cared about my education and infact, expected me to excel academically. I fondly remember my grandfather, a school teacher, who would dream that his granddaughter will become an Indian Administrative Officer (a civil servant in India, one hallmark of academic achievement) and nothing less. My mother - herself a proto-mathematician - wouldn't let me back away from studying maths and science. Often, she would demonstrate her own expertise by explaining complex concepts to me much better than my teacher could. These messages created a bubble for me in which girls were supposed to be good at science. Living in that bubble, I developed a passion for studying science and academic success became a part of my identity. It was only when I arrived to my engineering college campus that I realized that 
