---
layout: post
comments: true
title: Nicotinamide Mononucleotide (NMN)--The NAD+ Precursor That May Help Combat Aging and Disease
date: 2022-07-18 08:00:00
description: A promising compound for aging and age-related diseases
---
As we age, our cells gradually become less efficient at converting food into energy. This process, known as cellular senescence, is a major contributor to the aging process. But what if there were a way to help cells stay young and healthy for longer?

[Nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN)](https://www.foundmyfitness.com/topics/nicotinamide-mononucleotide) is a compound that has shown promise in treating aging and age-related diseases. NMN is an intermediate compound in the NAD+ salvage pathway, the recycling of nicotinamide into NAD+. NAD+ levels decrease with age and may in part drive the aging process and the development of age-related diseases. Boosting NAD+ levels through precursors has proven to have therapeutic potential in treating aging and age-related diseases across multiple animal models. NMN supplements are readily available, and studies in animal models have shown that NMN can help reverse age-related cellular decline and improve cognitive function.

In a study involving diet-induced diabetic mice, injection of 500 milligrams per kilogram of body weight (mg/kg/bw) of nicotinamide mononucleotide administered for seven days enhanced insulin sensitivity and improved glucose intolerance compared to that observed among mice not given nicotinamide mononucleotide. Additionally, the mice that were fed nicotinamide mononucleotide had improved skeletal muscle mitochondrial function, increased energy expenditure, increased bone density, and decreased insulin resistance in a dose-dependent manner.

Rats that were injected with 500 mg/kg/bw of nicotinamide mononucleotide every day for 10 days demonstrated sustained improvement in cognitive function as well as an attenuation of neuronal cell death. These data suggest that nicotinamide mononucleotide has potential as a therapy for aging and age-related diseases. However, the safety and efficacy of NMN supplementation in humans remain unknown.

The first human clinical trial of NMN is now underway, and early results are promising. If NMN is found to be safe and effective in humans, it could be a major breakthrough in the fight against aging and age-related diseases.
