---
layout: post
title: Sprint Travel, November 2022
date: 2022-11-01 00:00:00-0000
description: A summary of the travel to the autumn 2022 sprint
tags: train travel canonical
categories: train-travel
related_posts: false
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

# Location

We're off to the lovely city of Prague!

I'd never travelled across europe before this, so I used it as an opportunity to visit a few more places than stricly neccesary, and spend a few hours at different train stations.

I should apologise for the image quality: This was the final month of my dying old phone.

# Outbound Oct 22, 2022

Planned time: 21h 55m

Transfers: 5

Countries: 4 (UK, BE, DE, CZ)

Distance: 1494Km

Most looked forward to train: Köln to Berlin

## Chichester
Departure – 11.22<br>Arrival Barnham – 11.30

Departure Barnham – 11.36<br>Arrival Victoria – 13.13

Standard trains where I live, electrostar 377, so I didn't take many photos. Only this image of the final train as I walked past it at London Victoria.

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_southern.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## St Pancras
Departure – 15.04<br>Arrival at Bruxelles – 17.05

I really wish I'd grabbed a picture of all the Tube trains I jumped on, because the Victoria line was very delayed, but I was a little more focused on getting to St.Pancras on time!

Boarding the absolutely gorgeous eurostar e320, I took a slightly blurry image of the other stabled beside us. They served a delicious meal too!

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_eurostar.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_eurostar_meal.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## Bruxelles
Departure – 18.25<br>Arrival at Köln – 20.15

My first time in belgium. Bruxelles Midi was definitely a station. Thalys services were awesome, but someone was sat in my seat before I boarded ):

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_thalys.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_thalys_meal.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## Köln
Departure – 22.15<br>Arrival at Berlin – 05.11

This might be my all time favourite station. I loved the hours sat here watching the trains go by while eating dinner. This was also my first experience with night running trains, which was quite the enjoyable time.

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_ice.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_ice_seats.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## Berlin
Departure – 08.00<br>Arrival at Prague – 12.35

Very enjoyable, wandered across all the levels and took a small walk outside waiting for the trainsfer. Both the train and backup train were canceled however, which was a little stressful when you're a million metres from home.

Relaxed at Prague with mapo tofu for lunch. I visited this place a few more times to sample the food, it was delicious

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_cz_carriage.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/outbound_cz_locomotive.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/mapo_tofu.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>
	
# Inbound Nov 5, 2022

Planned time: 22h 14m

Transfers: 5

Countries: 4 (CZ, DE, BE, UK)

Distance: 1309Km

Most looked forward to train: Regensburg to Köln

## Prague
Departure – 16.38<br>Arrival at Schwandorf 20.05

I may have forotten to take a photo here.

## Schwandorf
Departure – 21.07<br>Arrival at Regensburg – 21.07

I may have forotten to take a photo here.

## Regensburg
Departure – 22.56<br>Arrival at Köln – 06.02

I was a bit too tired for a photo of the train at Regensburg, so instead have a photo of the carraige I slept in when we reached Köln.

It was a very novel and enjoyable experience riding a sleeper train, would absolutely do it again!

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/inbound_sleeper.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## Köln
Departure – 08.42<br>Arrival at Bruxelles 10.35

My first experience with the ice3, and I was quite impressed. Caught a great shot of the speed too.

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/inbound_ice.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/inbound_ice_speed.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## Bruxelles
Departure – 11.52<br>Arrival at St Pancras – 13.57

A delicious meal and the classic eurostar of my childhood, I was quite happy.

<swiper-container keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/inbound_eurostar.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sprint2211/inbound_eurostar_meal.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

## Victoria
Departure – 15.35<br>Arrival at Chichester – 17.21

No images, this was a standard train again

# Rating

Trains: Solid across the board. Was very surprised to find loco hauled services in Czechia, but it was a pleasant surprise.

Stations: Bruxelles was the lowest point of the journey, Köln was the highest. Regensburg was quite nice.

Destination: Loved Prague, favourite european city to have visited yet.