---
layout: distill
title: Configuring Python Code
description: Best Practices To Configure Python Projects
date: 2022-08-01

authors:
  - name: Shukrullo Nazirjonov
    affiliations:
      name: Nagoya University, Japan


bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Python Packaging
  - name: Relative Imports
  - name: Useful trick
  - name: Stepdown Rule
  - name: Recap

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---

Python is an amazing language. It enables me to quickly prototype a solution to any kind of scripting tasks.
However, as my code grows in size and complexity, I find myself refactoring stuff around, creating extra tests that I should have created a week ago, and creating config files for seemingly simple stuff. 
I do not have the vision for the perfect organization of my project; I guess most people don't and that's okay.  

Only way to efficiently organize code is by making mistakes and being willing to change mindset.
These are some of the useful tricks I learned over the past couple of weeks. This writing is merely a reminder for my future self. If you find it useful, I am glad!

## Python Packaging
Python Packaging seems quite straightforward at the first glance. It usually requires a setup.py file to identify the modules in the package and record some meta-data about the package. Here's a minimal code for setup.py file:
{% highlight python %}
from setuptools import setup
setup(
     name='yourproject',
     version='0.0.1',
     description='Shrek's first repo on Github',
     url='https://github.com/shrekshreky/shrek',
     author='Shrek Shreksky',
     author_email='shrekshreksky2000@gmail.com',
     licence='MIT',
     packages=['src','mypkg/dataio','mypkg/helpers'],
)
{% endhighlight %}

The most important thing here is to list all the packages, subpackages, sub-subpackages in your project. For smaller projects, it is ok to list packages manually. However, if your project is more complex with many subpackages, then **setuptools.find_packages()** helps you locate them automatically. Use the **include** keyword argument to find only the given packages.

{% highlight python lineos %}
packages=find_packages(include=['sample','sample.*']),
{% endhighlight %}

You can add all the extra details into this setup.py file, of course but this is the minimal setup file that I found to be applicable in many cases. Read more about python packaging in this [post](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/distributing-packages-using-setuptools/#setup-args)
## Relative Imports
## Useful Trick
## Stepdown Rule
## Recap
