---
layout: post
title: Devoxx UK 2023
date: 2023-05-18 22:01:00
description: The Developer Community Conference
tags: programming
related_posts: false
# categories: sample-posts
---
Recently, I had the opportunity to attend Devoxx UK, a conference dedicated to software development. It was an incredible event with a diverse range of speakers who covered various topics including Java, Cloud, Data, AI, Programming Languages, Architecture, Developer Practices, Culture, and much more. With over 170 talks in total, there was something for everyone. In this blog post, I want to highlight my personal favorite sessions from the conference.

<br />

#### Scaling: from 0 to 20 million users by Josip Stuhli
----
During his captivating presentation, Josip leads the audience on an architectural adventure that begins with a modest setup—a single desktop running Apache Server. However, as demand grew, so did the challenges. Josip skillfully addresses the hurdles he encountered while accommodating an expanding user base and offers actionable strategies to overcome them. This talk stood out as one of my personal favorites, earning a subjective `score of 9 out of 10`.

Here are the key takeaways:
* `Cache, cache, cache`, leveraging a reverse proxy whenever possible.
* `Monitor everything` comprehensively, but `optimize selectively` to maximize efficiency.
* Gain deep insights into user behaviors to `tailor your solutions` accordingly.
* Be `open to exploring` new technologies while maintaining the `readiness to roll back` if needed.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0 d-flex align-items-center justify-content-center">
        <iframe width="100%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/d22iKaVHfdg" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>
</div>

<br />
<br />

#### Learning Through Tinkering by Tom Cools
----
Tom emphasizes the `importance of incremental learning`. Through the concept of "The Zone of Proximal Development," he conveys a powerful message: to foster sustainable growth and avoid discouragement, we should `focus on acquiring knowledge and skills that are within our reach`. By tackling subjects that are not too far beyond our current understanding, we can maintain a sense of progress and avoid overwhelming ourselves. Tom's talk was both informative and enjoyable, earning a subjective `score of 8 out of 10`. I highly recommend it.

Key takeaway:
* Embrace the practice of `learning one thing at a time`.


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0 d-flex align-items-center justify-content-center">
        <iframe width="100%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/nwhwNfO1WMQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>
</div>


<br />
<br />

#### What being a Sensei taught me about improving by Roy Braam
----
In his role as a Sensei, Braam meticulously observed his students, noting their strengths and weaknesses. Traditionally, he would concentrate on helping them improve in areas where they struggled the most. However, after studying successful Dutch athletes and their coaches, Braam made a surprising discovery that completely transformed his teaching approach. Subjective `score 8 out of 10`.

Key takeaways:
* Focus on `enhancing your strengths`, as other areas will naturally improve over time.
* `Value effort` rather than results.
* Foster a safe environment where individuals `feel comfortable taking risks` and learning from failures.


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0 d-flex align-items-center justify-content-center">
        <iframe width="100%" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2srpGZeClXc" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>
</div>
