---
layout: post
title: Visiting Sopot
date: 2023-04-15 21:01:00
description: One of the coolest towns in northern Poland
tags: travel
related_posts: false
# categories: sample-posts
---
I had always wanted to visit Sopot, a beautiful coastal town in Poland, known for its stunning beaches and bustling nightlife. Finally, I got the opportunity to visit Sopot for a few days and I was not disappointed.

As soon as I entered the hotel, I was blown away by the view from my room. I could see the sea stretching out in front of me, and the sound of the waves crashing against the shore was soothing to my ears. I often found myself gazing out of the window, taking in the `breathtaking view`.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sopot/1.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sopot/2.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A snapshot of the pier and the view from the hotel room.
</div>

One day, with my girlfriend, I visited a local ramen restaurant that I can highly recommend. The restaurant was cozy and inviting, and the ramen was simply delicious. It was the perfect comfort food after a long day of work.

My visit to Sopot wouldn't be complete without a walk on the pier, which is one of the most iconic landmarks in Sopot. The pier stretches out into the sea, and it was a beautiful sight to see the waves crashing against the wooden planks. I took my time strolling along the pier, taking in the fresh sea air, the sound of the seagulls and a few pictures. Fun fact this pier, is the `longest wooden pier in Europe`.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sopot/5.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sopot/6.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

In the evenings, I enjoyed playing 7 Wonders Duel with my girlfriend in the comfort of our hotel room. The game was the perfect way to unwind after a working day and city exploration.

Overall, my visit to Sopot was everything I had hoped for and more. The stunning view from my hotel room, delicious food, beautiful scenery, and a relaxing game night all contributed to a memorable trip. I hope to return to Sopot someday and experience it all over again.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sopot/3.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/sopot/4.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
