---
layout: post
title: ASEEES Panels & Rountable 2023
date: 2023-11-28 15:40:00
description: program of my panels and roundtable 
tags: aseees conference 
categories: conference-posts
---
Please join me at the upcoming ASEEES Convetion at Philadelphia Marriott Downtown. I participate in two panels and one roundtable.

The first panel _Western Other in the Late Soviet Culture_ takes place this Thursday, November 30, at 1:30-2:45 pm at Salon I (5th floor). I serve as a discussant on this panel.

The panel is devoted to how the construct of the Western Other functioned in the late Soviet culture and ideology. The presentations are made on a variety of materials: photographs, literature, music and travel writings. The presented cases also demonstrate a different degree of censorship control: from official sources to sources reflecting the activities of underground organizations and subcultures. We hope to discuss what goals the image of the Western Other served in late Soviet culture and propaganda, what role it played in cultural transfer, how the image of the West reflected the intra-Soviet agenda.

Papers:
- [Ekaterina Lapina-Kratasyuk](https://independent.academia.edu/EkaterinaLapinaKratasyuk), L'Università degli Studi della Tuscia, “Foreign as Extraterrestrial: Alien Persons and 'Zones' in the Strugatsky Brothers’ Books”
- Alexey Kotelvas, University of Florida, “Soviet and Western Fashion in Travelogues of the Early Thaw”
- [Irina Veselova](https://independent.academia.edu/IrinaVeselova4), Independent Researcher, “Western Rock Musicians in the Cultural Imagination of Late Soviet Youngsters, 1975-1985”

My second panel 
