---
layout: post
title: Welcome
date: 2024-03-18 16:40:16
description: Introduction to the Blog
tags: welcome
categories: introduction
---

My name is Erin Howland. I am not very good at introducing myself. I like learning so much that I have four degrees. Two of them have gotten me jobs that pay a living wage. The other two have been, on the whole, the most used and most valued at every single job I’ve had, even though none of my employers have recognized that. They’ve also been the ones I use most on a daily basis. Education and the hiring process is weird. Life is weirder. Here are the degrees:
<ul>
    <li>BA History</li>
    <li>MA Nordic Studies (more history)</li>
    <li>BS Accounting</li>
    <li>MS Data Science</li>
</ul>

An important thing I’d like to note is that I am not an expert at anything, except perhaps asking questions and Googling and being unnecessarily enthusiastic and pedantic when discussing dogs. But that’s the thing. I’m an expert at asking questions. I’m an expert at having the motivation to find answers, plural, because there are so very many ways to think about things and there’s value in that. And sometimes what I find are not answers at all but more food for thought and to use to puzzle things out. Because sometimes there aren’t answers – until you create one.

Here on this blog you will find me talking about Python, Excel (I heard that groan!), Power Query, Tableau, and maybe even some R and Power Automate. I’ll also talk about some general things I’ve picked up on along the way that sound boring until you understand why it’s important, like file structure and naming conventions (*yaaaAAWn). 

I’ll explain things simply because one of the things I have found most frustrating is that so many people offering solutions and writing articles assume a level of knowledge that not everyone has. When you are an expert, or even if you’re not but you’ve been doing something long enough to forget that at one point you, too, knew nothing, it becomes difficult for a newbie to learn, or even for a practiced person to pick up an old skill.
