---
layout: post
title: Becoming friends with running
date: 2024-01-28 22:25:00
description:
tags: hobby learning
related_posts: false
# categories: sample-posts
---

Ever since primary school days, I associated running with breathlessness, extreme exertion, and fatigue. It's no surprise, as I participated in almost every school related running competition, busting the guts to be the fastest each time. Although, I loved other sports and tried to develop a similar feeling for running, my numerous efforts always went up in flames. I couldn't understand why.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/running/Mpark.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <!-- <div class="caption">
          Running location no 1: My home village forrest.
         </div> -->
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/running/Amstelpark.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <!-- <div class="caption">
          Amstelpark in January.
        </div> -->
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    I would have not witness those places in such beauty if not for running.
</div>

Everything changed when I expected it the least. I accidentally joined my sister for a run. Her pace was much slower than what I considered mine. I had to refrain myself from running fast. Surprisingly, after the run, I felt energised, joyful, and happy about the experience. Quite a difference from the usual "can't catch a breath" feeling. The next day, we went for another run. The post run impressions were the same. I realised that perhaps I had never approached running the right way, always pushing it to the max.

Soon after, I coincidentally signed up for a 1/4 Ironman event. I was excited about it and got extra motivation to sit down and research a bit about running. 

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/running/Egmond.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/running/EgmondRain.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Egmond run, famous for it's challenging weather conditions.
</div>

Now, as if by magic, for the last four months, I've run around three times a week. Enjoying every single run and continually improving my personal bests across various distances. I'm currently in my top running form, and I'd like to share a few things that made this remarkable transformation possible.

* **MADE IT ENJOYABLE:** I mostly run at feel-good pace, and treat sessions as an opportunity to unwind. Before, I would always try to run as fast as possible.

* **HAD A GOAL:** Signing up for a triathlon has provided extra motivation to build a solid running foundation. I feel like by going for a run I'm making a contribution to a bigger goal.

* **SCHEDULED RUNS:** I run on set days. Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays (+/- one day depending on special circumstances). I don't need to think about whether it's a good time for a run. I just do it.

* **VARIETY OF TRAININGS:** On Mondays and Wednesdays, I run at feel-good pace, and if I feel up to it, I do random faster intervals. Saturdays are dedicated to slow, long runs. I do them with a friend, thus combining running with socialising and post-run treat in form of coffee and cake combo. It feels like killing two birds with one stone (I love animals).

* **GEAR:** I invested in a pair of training shoes. They have good cushioning so I'm not afraid of harming myself. Moreover, it would be a pity if they dusted on a shoe rack.

Special thanks to youtube channel <a href="https://www.youtube.com/@adrianzycienasportowo"> Życienasportowo</a> which taught me loads about all running related topics.  

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/running/Polkowice.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <div class="caption">
          Starting line before a memorial run in Polkowice.
         </div>
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/running/PostRunTreat.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        <div class="caption">
          Post run treat.
        </div>
    </div>
</div>