---
layout: post
title: Anatomy of a Function
date: 2018-06-08 15:09:00
description: How does a function work?
tags: python, functions
categories: python
featured: true
---

Remember that Hello World assignment? We're coming back to it.

As a refresher, the assignment was my first coding assignment in my masters program for data science. I had to write code that would create an output of “Hello World” and I did so, with a lot of dramatics and very little understanding of why my code worked. Here’s what I submitted:

```python
def print_hello(name):
    print('Hello, ' + name + '!')

print_hello('World')
```

What I wrote, without fully understanding it, was a function. A function in Python is basically a container for a set of instructions, like a recipe. You have a list of ingredients and a list of steps and when you're done you get break or soup or casserole or whatever else you happen to be making. Let's break down the anatomy of my Hello World function.

In Python, "def" defines a function. In this context, "defines" really just means that it's labeling everything in that block of code as a function. You may name a function whatever you like. I named mine “print_hello.” I could have named it Tom, but that wouldn't be very useful - best practice is to name them in a way that indicates what they do. My function requires one argument (it’s like a specific kind of ingredient), which I called “name.” Next, we have a colon, which tells Python that you are done defining your function (the recipe name and list of ingredients) and are ready to give it its instructions (recipe steps). At this point, everything in your function will be indented to indicate that it is part of that function. In my case, my instructions were “print(‘Hello, ‘ + name + ‘!’)” The print statement here is combining a couple strings (‘Hello’ and ‘!’) with the function argument (“name”) to create a final output that will read “Hello, [name]!”

The last line just says “print_hello(‘World’).” I am calling the function I want to run by name (remember the function here is “print_hello” and takes “name” as an argument). Naturally, I will get an output of “Hello, World!” Had I entered, “print_hello(‘mom’)” my output would have been “Hello, mom!”

My first assignment, in other words, was complete overkill. I wrote a function so I could say “Hello!” to whomever, or whatever, I felt like. I recognize now that this thought process is completely on-brand for me and is, in many ways, extremely useful. When we build code, we do want to try to anticipate future use cases and make room for flexibility and growth. The difficulty is balancing anticipating growth and flexibility needs with time/budget constraints. If we’re too narrowly focused, we lose out on opportunities to adapt our code to other, similar situations, but if we’re too focused on the big picture, we can become encumbered with "what ifs" and we might spend a lot of time creating something that might be really cool, but that actually ends up being a one-off.

Key takeaways:
* A function is a set of instructions, and it requires a name and at least one argument.  
* Best practice is to name your functions to indicate what they do.  
* When coding, you'll want to constantly evaluate the balance between developing code that allows for growth and flexibility with time and budget constraints for that particular assignment.