---
layout: post
title: 'Call for Participation ASSETS&rsquo;24 Workshop "The Future of Urban Accessibility: The Role of AI"'
date: 2024-08-12
tags: event
categories: events
tabs: true
---

EVL faculty and Computer Science assistant professor Fabio Miranda along with colleagues Froehlich (UW, CS), Li (UW, CS), Hosseini (Berkeley, Planning), Sevtsuk (MIT, Planning), Eisenberg (UIC, Health) are organizing a virtual workshop focused on the role of AI in enhancing urban accessibility.  All researchers and practitioners interested in Urban+AI and disability should consider submitting a proposal to the <a href="https://accessiblecities.github.io/UrbanAccess2024/">ASSETS&rsquo;24 Workshop &ldquo;The Future of Urban Accessibility: The Role of AI&rdquo;</a>. The deadline is September 20, 2024<br><br>
How will AI transform urban infrastructure for people with disabilities--from public transportation and sidewalks to the design and use of buildings, housing, parks, and transit stations? What new mobility tools and techniques will AI enable from autonomous vehicles and micro-mobility solutions to personalized routing and accessible interactive maps? How can AI be used to effectively and ethically to solve urban accessibility problems and improve the quality of life for all? How can and should people with disabilities be involved with decisions about how AI is used in cities?<br><br>
In this workshop, we examine the emerging role of AI in the design of equitable and accessible cities, transportation systems, and interactive tools for mapping and navigation. We invite short papers (broadly construed), including experience reports, position papers, vision pieces, demonstrations, pictorials, or research summaries up to approximately 2,000 words on this topic (approximately 3 pages of formatted, two-column output). See example topic areas. For the word count, you can exclude figures, tables, captions, and the reference list. As we aim for a broad representation of viewpoints, disciplines, and work practices, please choose a format that you feel best conveys your work (e.g., single column, double column, ACM template).<br><br>
Submitted artifacts should not be anonymized and, in addition to their primary content, should include a bio of each author and rationale for attending the workshop. PDF submissions should be accessible following the ASSETS&rsquo;24 Accessibility Guidelines. Artifacts will be reviewed and selected by the co-organizers to balance topics, geographies, and communities of focus. Accepted authors will be required to register and virtually attend the workshop via Zoom on a date in October.<br><br>
Our overarching goals are to identify open challenges in Urban AI + disability, share current work across disciplines, and spur new collaborations in Urban AI + disability. As a secondary goal, we aim to synthesize and publish our discussions together in a jointly authored report perhaps to the SIGACCESS Newsletter or beyond.<br><br>
The Workshop will be held the week of October 21st (tdb).<br><br>
Link: [https://accessiblecities.github.io/UrbanAccess2024/#page-top](https://accessiblecities.github.io/UrbanAccess2024/#page-top)
